--- PAGE 1 ---

Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern
Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 693
Author: D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench: K M Joseph, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
                                                                  REPORTABLE
                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              Civil Appeal No. 6239 of 2019
          Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan                         ...Appellants
          and Aleya Sultana and Ors.
                                          Versus
          DLF Southern Homes Pvt Ltd                          ...Respondents
(now Known as BEGUR OMR Homes Pvt. Ltd.) and Ors.
With Civil Appeal No. 6303 of 2019 JUDGMENT Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, J 1 The National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 1 dismissed a consumer complaint filed by 339 flat
buyers, accepting the defence of DLF Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. and Annabel Builders and
Developers Pvt. Ltd. that there was no deficiency of service on their part in complying with their
contractual obligations and, that despite a delay in handing over the possession of the residential
flats, the purchasers were not entitled to compensation in excess of what was stipulated in the
Apartment Buyers Agreement2. 2 The complaint before the NCDRC was initially instituted by nine
flat buyers. These nine complainants had booked residential flats in a project called Westend
Heights at New Town, DLF, BTM Extension at Begu, Bengaluru. The project was being developed in
an area admeasuring 27.5 acres and was to consist of 1980 units, spread across nineteen towers each
consisting of a stilt and eighteen floors.
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
1

--- PAGE 2 ---

3 The Brochure of the first respondent advertised the nature of the project and the amenities which
would be provided to buyers. It held out the following representations on the basis of which buyers
were induced to invest:
“NCDRC” “ABA” “New Town - the premier choice for Bangalore living. A premium
residential enclave that celebrates life in all its resident splendor. Featuring spacious
apartments and a rich selection of amenities, you will find in New Town, a residence
specially appointed to maximize your comfort and convenience. In New Town
premium high rise apartments are set against the backdrop of a vibrant living
environment where fun, comfort, security, and serenity blend in perfect unison. Life
at New Town satisfies all your needs and fulfils your heart's desire. Imagine a place
where leisurely pursuits are always within reach. Imagine living where convenience is
never more than around the corner.
Westend Heights at New Tower DLF, BTM Extn.
Designs, keeping in mind the modern day requirements and meeting them with apt
amenities, Westend Heights is the first phase of New Town, with premium high-rise
apartments at affordable prices. The complex brings you comfort living embodied in
individual towers overlooking sprawling parks and vistas. This project is being
developed in a land area of 27. 5 acres. The project consists of 1980 units spread
across 19 towers that are Stilt+ 18 floors high.
Amenities Fun, Fitness, Leisure, Right Next Door The most exclusive Club in
Bangalore at New town, DLF BTM, EXTN, The Club set amidst a very comfortable
setting is an impressive feature of New Town. It is specially designed to take care of
all stresses brought on by the modern world. Altogether a beautiful composition, that
blends seamlessly with your lifestyle.
Swimming Pool:
Gymnasium/ Aerobics Centre Restaurant & Bar Billiards Room Banquet Hall Tennis
Courts Cards Room Squash Courts Spa, Massage & Beauty Parlour Ease, Enjoyment,
Convenience. Right Next Door Convenient shopping facilities at New Town, DLF
BTM EXTN Shop with ease at our convenience shopping centre, well equipped to
handle your everyday needs. The shopping centre will offer an array of outlets to
make your life a trouble free affair.
Experience convenience at your doorstep Hope, Dreams, Future. Right Next Door
Renowned Early Learning School at New Town DLF BTM EXTN.
Our play school airs to care for your child in a stimulating safe, fun-filled
environment. It symbolizes our conviction that nurtured roots lay the foundation of a
fully grown blossomed tree.
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
2

--- PAGE 3 ---

Health, Wellbeing. Assurance, Right Next Door State-of-the-art healthcare facilities
at New Town DLF BTM EXTN.
In these years of fast paced lives, your family's wellbeing is foremost in our minds.
Our healthcare centre will better the latest in screening, diagnosis, and medical care
with competent medical professionals by your side, we will make sure that you would
always remain in the best of health.
Comfort, Confidence, Peace of Mind Right Next Door.
Keeping your loves ones safe and secure at New Town, DLF BTM EXTN.
Let New Town set your mind at rest when it comes to security. Our advanced,
state-of-the-art security system ensures comfort & peace of mind for you and your
loved ones, with monitored gates, CCTV for parking and entrance lobby, video
surveillance system and a rigorously screened 24-hour security guard workforce, New
Town offers you a secure and a well-protected abode.” (emphasis supplied)
4 Responding to the representation held out by the developer, the complainants booked flats in the
residential project. The flat buyers entered into agreements with the developer. Clause 11(a) of the
ABA indicated that the developer would endeavour to complete construction within a period of
thirty-six months from the date of the execution of the agreement save and except for force majeure
conditions. Clause 11(a) provided:
“11. (a) Schedule for Possession of the Said Apartment The Company/LOC based on
the present plans and estimates and subject to all just exceptions, endeavors to
complete construction of the Said Building /Said Apartment within a period of thirty
six (36) months from the date of execution of this Agreement unless there shall be
delay or failure due to Force Majeure conditions including but not limited to reasons
mentioned in Clauses 11(b) and 11(c) or due to failure of Allottee to pay in time the
Total Price and other charges taxes, securities etc. and dues/payments or any failure
on the part of the Allottee to abide by all or any of the terms and conditions of this
Agreement.”
5 Force majeure stipulations were illustrated in sub-clauses (b) and (c) of clause 11, which included
delay due to the reasons beyond the control of the developer and failure to deliver possession due to
Government rules, orders or notifications, respectively. Construction was behind schedule. The flat
purchasers were informed on 12 January 2011 that possession of the apartments was expected to be
completed by the middle of 2012. This assurance was not fulfilled. By a communication dated 18
June 2013, the developers issued a revised timeline intimating all flat buyers that the delivery of
possession would commence from October 2013. However, on 8 August 2013 another
communication was issued stating that the real estate industry was affected by an economic slow-
down which had hampered the pace of construction. The date for handing over possession was
extended to June 2014. A tentative schedule for delivery was indicated under which Towers D1 and
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
3

--- PAGE 4 ---

D2 would be handed over by January 2014, and Towers A3 to A6, A7, B3 and B4 would be handed
over by May 2014. On 8 August 2014, the timelines for handing over possession were again
extended by the developers : under the revised schedule the flats in Towers D1 and D2 were to be
handed over in August 2014, those in A1 to A-7 in February 2015, B1 to B6 in April 2015 and C1 to
C4 in June 2015. On 4 May 2015, the developers issued another communication indicating the
progress of the work and informed the purchasers that site visits had been initiated for the project
“till we receive the occupancy certificate for clusters A, B and C”. This is an admission of the fact that
until then the occupation certificate had not been received. The obligation to handover possession
within a period of thirty-six months was not fulfilled.
6 The first batch of nine flat purchasers moved a consumer complaint before the NCDRC
complaining of a breach by the developer of the obligation, contractually assumed, under the terms
of the ABA. Since the nine complainants purported to represent the entire group of flat purchasers,
a notice of the complaint under Section 12(1)(c) of the Consumer Protection Act 19863 was
published in the newspapers.
7 Numerous applications for impleadment were allowed by the NCDRC and an amended complaint
was ordered to be filed. On the complainants moving an application under Section 12(1)(c), the
NCDRC by its order dated 21 November 2017 permitted them to file the complaint on behalf or for
the benefit of all the flat buyers who were interested in the reliefs. However, flat buyers who had (i)
executed deeds of conveyance; or (ii) executed affidavits while accepting the agreed compensation in
full and final satisfaction; or (iii) received possession within the stipulated time period; or (iv) had
sold their flats after the execution of the conveyance; or (v) who were subsequent purchasers having
purchased the flat after the execution of the conveyance deed were to remain outside the purview of
the proceedings. Further, the buyers from whom Preferential Location Charges, charges for the
preferential location of the apartment, were not charged and were not chargeable were to remain
out of the class on whose behalf or benefit the complaint was instituted. On a challenge to the order,
this Court by an “CP Act 1986” order dated 10 April 2018 directed:
“Since the complaint filed by the appellants was only by nine persons jointly for their
benefit, the same could not be treated to be in representative capacity. Accordingly,
the impugned order is set aside.
Aggrieved parties are at liberty to file an appropriate fresh application under Section
12(1)(c) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 before the National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission within two weeks from today. The same may be
disposed of by the National Commission in accordance with law within three months
from the date of filing of such an application.”
8 Pursuant to the liberty which was granted by this Court, an I.A.4 was filed before the NCDRC
under Section 12(1)(c). The application was disposed of on 13 July 2018 which led to an appeal
before this Court.
9 On 28 September 2018, this Court set aside the order of the NCDRC with the following directions:
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
4

--- PAGE 5 ---

“Having heard learned counsel for the appellants, we are of the view that the
impugned judgment dated 13.07.2018 needs to be set aside. We set it aside and direct
the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission to treat the complaint, as
amended, that has been filed, as a complaint filed on behalf of all 339 persons and to
proceed on merits.
It will be open for the respondents to give their say on the merits of each of the 339
complainants.
The Commission will decide the matter within a period of six months from today.
The Civil Appeals are disposed of accordingly.”
10 Procedural directions issued upon several impleadment applications resulted in a further order of
this Court of 8 May 2019 reiterating that the complaint would be treated as having been filed on
behalf of 339 persons. By its order dated 28 September 2018, which was reiterated again on 8 May
2019, this Court had laid down a peremptory time schedule of six months for the disposal of the
complaint. Eventually, on 2 July 2019, the complaint was dismissed by the NCDRC.
11 Civil Appeal No 6239 of 2019 comprises of 83 appellants. Civil Appeal No 6303 of 2019 comprises
of 88 appellants. Thus, there are before this Court a total of 171 flat purchasers in the appeals. The
complaint before the NCDRC, which was confined by the order of this Court dated 28 September
2018 to 339 complainants, now covers a more restricted field of 171 flat purchasers. Annexure-1 to
Civil Appeal No 6239 of 2019 contains a tabulation of (i) names of the flat purchasers; (ii) dates on
which the flats were booked; (iii) dates on which the ABAs were signed; (iv) dates by which
possession was to be handed over under the ABAs; and (v) dates on which the letter for possession
was issued by the developers.
12 The NCDRC divided the group of 339 flat buyers into six groups based on whether or not they
had taken possession, executed deeds of conveyance, settled the dispute or sold the flats before or
during the pendency of the complaint or their applications for impleadment:
‚ Group A: Complainants who took possession of their flats before the filing of the
complaint/impleadment applications.
‚ Group B: Complainants who took possession and executed deeds of conveyance
during the pendency of the complaint/impleadment applications.
‚ Group C: Complainants who took possession during the pendency of the
complaint/impleadment applications but have not executed deeds of conveyance.
‚ Group D: Complainants who settled their dispute during the pendency of the
complaint/ impleadment applications.
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
5

--- PAGE 6 ---

‚ Group E: Complainants who sold their flats during the pendency of the
complaint/impleadment applications.
‚ Group F: Complainants who have not taken possession of the flats and have not
executed a deed of conveyance.
13 The NCDRC held that flat buyers in Groups A and B who had taken possession before the filing of
the complaint / impleadment applications and those who took possession and executed deeds of
conveyance before or during the pendency of the proceedings would not be entitled to pursue their
claims. The execution of the deed of conveyance, according to the NCDRC, is a transfer of a right in
property and it is not within the jurisdiction of the Commission to entertain a grievance that the
conveyances have been entered into under coercion. Additionally, according to NCDRC, under the
conveyance deed, such flat buyers had accorded their satisfaction to the services provided by the
developer and voluntarily discharged the developer of all its liabilities under the ABA. As regards flat
purchasers in Group C, the NCDRC noted that even those who have taken possession but have not
executed a deed of conveyance have voluntarily discharged the developer. The NCDRC observed that
flat buyers in Group C had taken possession without protest, without its permission and without
lodging any complaint with it after taking the possession. Those in Group D who had settled their
dispute during the pendency of the complaint were held to be estopped from pursuing their
grievances. The NCDRC did not accept the contention of the flat buyers in Group D that that they
had settled the matter under coercion and undue influence since, according to the NCDRC, no
specific facts and circumstances were pleaded by such flat buyers which made them surrender their
free will. The buyers in Group E who have sold their flats during the pendency of the complaint were
held to have no subsisting right. The NCDRC noted that as regards Group F (complainants who had
neither taken possession nor executed a conveyance), as many as 337 out of 339 flat purchasers had
in fact taken possession. The NCDRC had to deal with the claims of two remaining complainants,
who had accepted the delayed compensation but did not accept possession. Their complaints were
dismissed.
14 The primary grounds on which compensation have been sought before the NCDRC were:
(i) Delay in handing over possession of the flats;
(ii) Reimbursement of taxes and interest charged to the flat purchasers under clause
1.10 of the ABA;
(iii) Deficiency in providing amenities;
(iv)    Levy of electricity charges by the developer; and
(v)     Failure to construct the club house.
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
6

--- PAGE 7 ---

15      The NCDRC, in the course of its judgment, observed that delay in the
handing over of flats to the flat purchasers was admitted. While recording a finding of
fact that there was an admitted delay on the part of the developer, the NCDRC held
that the agreements provided compensation at the rate of Rs 5 per square foot of the
super area for every month of delay. The NCDRC held that the flat purchasers who
agreed to this stipulation in the agreements were not entitled to seek any amount in
addition. Paragraph 470 of the judgment of the NCDRC contains its finding:
“470. There is no dispute to the fact that the completion of the project had been
delayed. Delay had been acknowledged by the opposite parties. They had also offered
to these complainants the delayed compensation calculated @ Rs 5/- per sq. ft. of the
super area.” The NCDRC observed that the developer had while computing the final
demand made an adjustment on account of delayed compensation at the rate
stipulated in the ABA. The flat purchasers having been provided credit at the rate
agreed by the developers, it was held that no further entitlement existed under the
law. In the view of the NCDRC, the flat purchasers had failed to prove that the
stipulation contained in the agreement for the payment of compensation at Rs 5 per
square foot was unreasonable. In taking this view, the Commission has lent support
to its decision by relying upon the decisions of this Court in DLF Homes Panchkula
Pvt. Ltd. v. D S Dhanda, Etc.5 (“Dhanda”) and Ghaziabad Development Authority v.
Balbir Singh6(“Balbir Singh”). On the merits of the other grievances, the NCDRC has
held that
(i) The charges recovered towards tax and interest are in terms of clause 1.10 of the
ABA;
(ii) Charges recovered for electricity are in terms of the ABA;
      (iii)      The levy of parking charges is valid; and
      (iv)       The club house has been constructed.
16            In order to facilitate the final disposal of the Civil Appeals, counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellants formulated the nature of the grievances of the flat buyers in
the written submissions tendered during the hearing. Mr Prashant Bhushan, learned Counsel
appearing for the appellants has formulated his submissions under the following heads:
(i) There is a gross delay ranging between two and four years in handing over
possession and the flat buyers ought not to be constrained by the terms of the
agreement which are one-sided and unreasonable;
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
7

--- PAGE 8 ---

(ii) The execution of conveyances or settlement deeds would not operate to preclude
the flat buyers from claiming compensation. The emails of the developer clearly
indicate that the flat buyers were not permitted to execute conveyances or to receive
possession under protest;
(iii) The amenities which have been contracted for have not been provided 2019 SCC
OnLine SC 689 (2004) 5 SCC 65 by the developers; and
(iv) The flat buyers are not liable to indemnify the developer for the demand of
interest and penalty raised by the tax authorities as a result of the failure to deposit
the tax on time. During the oral arguments, it was clarified that only interest has been
recovered from the flat buyers.
The above submissions of Mr Prashant Bhushan have been reiterated in the submissions urged
before the Court by Mr Bishwajit Bhattacharya, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of
another group of purchasers. Mr R Balasubramanian, learned Senior Counsel has, while adopting
the submissions which were urged by Mr Prashant Bhushan, advanced submissions on the levy of
electricity charges and charges for parking spaces.
17 Opposing the submissions which have been urged on behalf of the appellants, Mr Pinaki Misra,
learned Senior Counsel urged that:
(i) Despite the order of this Court dated 28 September 2018, no evidence has been led
by the complainants to discharge the onus placed upon them to establish coercion or
duress while executing conveyances or settlements;
(ii) Possession of the complex, which is situated on land admeasuring about 27 acres
and comprising of 813 apartments in nineteen towers has been handed over between
four to six years ago and the developer has transferred his right, title and interest to
the Residentsƒ Welfare Association (“RWA”);
(iii) The allottees have benefited by the appreciation in the value of their flats;
(iv) Out of 171 applicants, 145 have received compensation at the agreed rate while
handing over possession. The allotments were escalation free and the burden of
increased costs has been borne by the developer;
(v) Under clause 14 of the ABA, the flat buyers have been compensated at the rate of
Rs 5 per square foot per month which would work out to about Rs 7500 per month
for a flat admeasuring 1500 square feet. No proof or measure of actual loss suffered
has been adduced;
(vi) The facts pertaining to the appellants would indicate that:
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
8

--- PAGE 9 ---

(a) Eighteen appellants executed conveyances before filing the complaints;
(b) Fifty-four appellants executed conveyances during the course of the proceedings;
(c) Fifty appellants executed conveyances after the impugned judgment;
(d) The above individuals include 11 who have entered into written settlement deeds;
(e) There is no delay in offering possession to seven appellants;
and
(f) Three appellants are continuing to agitate their grievances despite having transferred their rights
in the flats. Out of 171 appellants, 122 executed conveyances before the complaint;
during the pendency of the proceedings or thereafter. Eleven appellants who have entered into
settlements did not raise a ground of coercion prior to a reply which was filed in December 2018
shortly before the final hearing;
(vii) As regards the construction of facilities and amenities, a club house containing a swimming
pool, gymnasium, tennis court, indoor badminton court and squash courts has been constructed and
an occupation certificate has been received on 13 May 2019. The RWA is conscious of the fact that
difficulties in the allotment arose as a result of the action of the Bangalore Development Authority7
which led to the filing of writ proceedings before the High Court of Karnataka both by the developer
and the RWA. Even after the receipt of the occupation certificate, the developers have been
corresponding with BDA for permission to hand over possession to the RWA. Other amenities
including a school and health care facilities were going to be developed in the entire township
comprising of 80 acres of which the complex of 27 acres was a part. The flat buyers were aware of
the fact that under the terms of the ABA, the allottees have no right, title or interest in the amenities
outside their residential complex and forming a part of the wider complex of 80 acres. Moreover,
this issue is rendered academic since the area around DLF township has become urbanized where
adequate facilities are available;
“BDA”
(viii) Clauses 1.3, 1.10, 2 and 3 require the allottees to bear tax liabilities including towards works
contract tax. When the project commenced in 2009, there was an absence of clarity in regard to the
liability on account of works contract tax which was settled eventually by the judgment of this Court
in Larsen and Toubro Limited v. State of Karnataka8. It was as a result of this judgment that the
issue was settled following which, the developer while computing the amount payable in the final
statements of accounts passed on the liability on account of the interest (but not towards penalty) on
a proportionate basis in terms of clause 1.10 of the ABA;
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
9

--- PAGE 10 ---

(ix) Clause 23(b) entitles the developer to raise a demand on a proportionate basis from the flat
buyers for electricity charges. Initially, BESCOM provided a connection for electricity but
subsequently as a substantial load was required, the developer was permitted to build its own
electricity sub-station. This was built at a cost of Rs. 18.01 crores for which the pro rata cost could be
allocated to flat buyers in terms of clause 23(b); and
(x) The price of the apartment, as agreed in the ABA, included in the breakup, parking charges for
exclusive use of earmarked parking spaces. Parking charges were also revealed upfront in the
brochure. The appellants had erroneously relied on the decision of this Court in Nahalchand
Laloochand Private Limited v. Panchali Cooperative (2014) 1 SCC 708 Housing Society Limited9,
which turned on the construction of the provisions of the Maharashtra Apartment Ownership Act
1971 and Development Control Regulations for Greater Bombay 1991. This has subsequently been
explained in the decision in DLF Limited v. Manmohan Lowe10. There is no prohibition in the
Karnataka Apartment Ownership Act upon the developer providing earmarked parking charges in
the breakup of the total price of the apartment. The rival submissions will now be analysed.
Compensation for delayed possession 18 The fulcrum of the case of the developer rests on clause 14
of the ABA which is in the following terms:
“14. The Allottee agrees and understands that if the company is unable to give
possession within the period as mentioned above or such extended period as
permitted under this Agreement, due to reasons other than those mentioned in this
Agreement, then the Company agrees to pay only to the Allottee and not to anyone
else, subject to the Allottee, not being in default under any terms of this Agreement
compensation @ Rs. 5/- per sq. feet of the Super Area of the said apartment per
month for the period of such Delay. The adjustment of such compensation shall be
done only at the time of execution of the Conveyance Deed of the Said Apartment to
the Allottee first named under this Agreement and not, earlier.”
19 Clause 11(a) of the ABA indicates that subject to “all just exceptions” the developer endeavoured
to complete construction within a period of thirty-six months from the date of the execution of the
agreement unless hindered by force (2010) 9 SCC 536 (2014) 12 SCC 231 majeure conditions.
Undoubtedly, the expression „endeavourƒ indicates that the developer did not bind itself to an
inflexible timeline of thirty-six months. But then again, the timeline of thirty-six moths was subject
to just exceptions and could be excused in the event of force majeure conditions coming into
operation. By the provisions of clause 14, the developer agreed to compensate the flat buyers at the
rate of Rs. 5 per square feet of the super area of the apartment per month for the period of delay.
According to the developer (i) the flat purchasers are bound by the above stipulations under which
their entitlement was to receive compensation at the agreed rate (and hence not beyond); and (ii) no
evidence has been adduced to indicate that the rate which has been prescribed in the agreement is
unreasonable. The developer relies on the observation in the decision of this Court in Dhanda11 that
when parties have agreed to a consequence of delay in handing over possession, there must be
exceptional and strong reasons for the consumer fora to award compensation at more than the
agreed rate. In assessing these submissions, we must at the outset note the submission of Mr
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
10

--- PAGE 11 ---

Prashant Bhushan, learned Counsel that:
“There are a total of 4 blocks in „WESTEND HEIGHTSƒ project. In Blocks A, B and
C, the delay is huge, over 4 years. For block D, the average delay is 2 years. Out of 339
complainants, for 268, the delay is huge, over 4 years.
The Builder sought repeated extension of time to deliver possession, vide
communications dated 18.06.201312, 8.8.201313, 8.8.201414, 4.5.201515 etc.” 2019
SCC OnLine SC 689 Annexure A9 @ page 929 Annexure A10 @ page 932, 933
Annexure A11 @ page 936 Annexure A12 @ page 938
20 The extent of the delay as set out in the above submissions has not been controverted in the
submissions which were urged before this Court by the developer. On the contrary, the finding of the
NCDRC in paragraph 470 of its judgment is that:
“…there is no dispute to the fact that the completion of the project has been delayed.
Delay has been acknowledged by the opposite parties….”
21 The existence and extent of the delay constitute an admitted factual position. In fact, in the
written submissions which have been filed by the developer, it has been admitted that out of 171
appellants, 145 were given compensation in terms of the rate prescribed in clause 14 of the ABA.
Once the developer has accepted that there was a delay on his part which triggered of the liability to
pay compensation (albeit, according to the developer, in terms of clause 14) there can be no manner
of doubt that:
(i) the developer assumed an obligation in terms of the ABA to endeavour to hand
over possession in thirty-six months of the date of the execution of the agreement;
(ii) there was a failure on the part of the developer to comply with the contractual
obligation;
(iii) the failure of the developer was neither relatable to a “just exception” or the
prevalence of force majeure conditions referable to clause 11; and
(iv) the payment of compensation to the flat buyers or at least 145 of the group of 171
represents an admission by the developer of its breach, thereby triggering a liability
to pay compensation.
22 The only issue which then falls for determination is whether the flat buyers in these
circumstances are constrained by the stipulation contained in clause 14 of ABA providing
compensation for delay at the rate of Rs 5 per square feet per month. In assessing the legal position,
it is necessary to record that the ABA is clearly one-sided. Where a flat purchaser pays the
instalments that are due in terms of the agreement with a delay, clause 39(a) stipulates that the
developer would “at its sole option and discretion” waive a breach by the allottee of failing to make
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
11

--- PAGE 12 ---

payments in accordance with the schedule, subject to the condition that the allottee would be
charged interest at the rate of 15 per cent per month for the first ninety days and thereafter at an
additional penal interest of 3 per cent per annum. In other words, a delay on the part of the flat
buyer attracts interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum beyond ninety days. On the other hand,
where a developer delays in handing over possession the flat buyer is restricted to receiving interest
at Rs 5 per square foot per month under clause 14 (which in the submission of Mr Prashant Bhushan
works out to 1-1.5 per cent interest per annum). Would the condition which has been prescribed in
clause 14 continue to bind the flat purchaser indefinitely irrespective of the length of the delay? The
agreement stipulates thirty-six months as the date for the handing over of possession. Evidently, the
terms of the agreement have been drafted by the developer. They do not maintain a level platform as
between the developer and purchaser. The stringency of the terms which bind the purchaser are not
mirrored by the obligations for meeting times lines by the developer. The agreement does not reflect
an even bargain.
23 On behalf of the flat purchasers it has been urged by Mr. R Balasubramanian (a submission
which has not been controverted in rejoinder) that 95 per cent of the purchase price was paid during
the course of the first two and a half to three years. The agreement did not stipulate that the
developer would pay any interest on the amount which had already been received. A large chunk of
the purchase price was thus available to the developer to complete construction. The court must take
a robust and common-sense based approach by taking judicial notice of the fact that flat purchasers
obtain loans and are required to pay EMIs to financial institutions for servicing their debt. Delays on
the part of the developer in handing over possession postpone the date on which purchasers will
obtain a home. Besides servicing their loans, purchasers have to finance the expenses of living
elsewhere. To postulate that a clause in the agreement confining the right of the purchaser to receive
compensation at the rate of Rs 5 per square foot per month (Rs 7,500 per month for a flat of 1500
square feet) precludes any other claim would be a manifestly unreasonable construction of the rights
and obligations of the parties. Where there is a delay of the nature that has taken place in the
present case ranging between periods of two years and four years, the jurisdiction of the consumer
forum to award reasonable compensation cannot be foreclosed by a term of the agreement. The
expression deficiency of services is defined in Section 2 (1) (g) of the CP Act 1986 as:
“(g) "deficiency" means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the
quality, nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or
under any law for the time being in force or has been undertaken to be performed by
a person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service”
24 A failure of the developer to comply with the contractual obligation to provide the flat to a flat
purchaser within a contractually stipulated period amounts to a deficiency. There is a fault,
shortcoming or inadequacy in the nature and manner of performance which has been undertaken to
be performed in pursuance of the contract in relation to the service. The expression „serviceƒ in
Section 2 (1) (o) means a service of any description which is made available to potential users
including the provision of facilities in connection with (among other things) housing construction.
Under Section 14(1)(e), the jurisdiction of the consumer forum extends to directing the opposite
party inter alia to remove the deficiency in the service in question. Intrinsic to the jurisdiction which
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
12

--- PAGE 13 ---

has been conferred to direct the removal of a deficiency in service is the provision of compensation
as a measure of restitution to a flat buyer for the delay which has been occasioned by the developer
beyond the period within which possession was to be handed over to the purchaser. Flat purchasers
suffer agony and harassment, as a result of the default of the developer. Flat purchasers make
legitimate assessments in regard to the future course of their lives based on the flat which has been
purchased being available for use and occupation. These legitimate expectations are belied when the
developer as in the present case is guilty of a delay of years in the fulfilment of a contractual
obligation. To uphold the contention of the developer that the flat buyer is constrained by the terms
of the agreed rate irrespective of the nature or extent of delay would result in a miscarriage of
justice. Undoubtedly, as this court held in Dhanda, courts ordinarily would hold parties down to a
contractual bargain. Equally the court cannot be oblivious to the one-sided nature of ABAs which
are drafted by and to protect the interest of the developer. Parliament consciously designed
remedies in the CP Act 1986 to protect consumers. Where, as in the present case, there has been a
gross delay in the handing over of possession beyond the contractually stipulated debt, we are
clearly of the view that the jurisdiction of the consumer forum to award just and reasonable
compensation as an incident of its power to direct the removal of a deficiency in service is not
constrained by the terms of a rate which is prescribed in an unfair bargain. 25 Numerous judgments
of this Court have elaborated on the nature and extent of the jurisdiction of the consumer forum to
award just and reasonable compensation. Since the decision of this Court in Lucknow Development
Authority v. M K Gupta16 , it has been a settled principle of law that the jurisdiction of the consumer
forum extends to the award of compensation to alleviate the harassment and agony to a consumer.
In Balbir Singh17, a two judge Bench of this Court, while explaining the ambit of the jurisdiction of
the adjudicatory fora under the CP Act 1986 observed:
“6…The word compensation is of a very wide connotation. It may constitute actual
loss or expected loss and may extend to compensation for physical, mental or even
emotional suffering, insult or injury or loss. The provisions of the Consumer
Protection Act enable a consumer to claim and empower the Commission to redress
any injustice done. “
26 The court observed that the award of compensation has to be based on a finding of loss or injury
and must correlate to it. The court observed that no “hard and fast rule” could be prescribed:
(1994) 1 SCC 243 (2004) 5 SCC 65 “8…No hard-and-fast rule can be laid down,
however, a few examples would be where an allotment is made, price is received/paid
but possession is not given within the period set out in the brochure. The
Commission/Forum would then need to determine the loss. Loss could be
determined on basis of loss of rent which could have been earned if possession was
given and the premises let out or if the consumer has had to stay in rented premises
then on basis of rent actually paid by him. Along with recompensing the loss the
Commission/Forum may also compensate for harassment/injury, both mental and
physical. “ Where possession has been given, one of the circumstances which must be
factored in is that the purchaser has been compensated by the increase in the value of
the property.
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
13

--- PAGE 14 ---

27 In R V Prasannakumaar v. Mantri Castles Pvt Ltd18 under the terms of the ABA, possession of
the flats was to be handed over to the buyers on 31 January 2014. However, the developer received
an occupation certificate only on 10 February 2016 and it was thereafter from May 2016 that the
developer started issuing letters offering possession. Based on this, the NCDRC awarded
compensation in the form of interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum. The developer had pleaded
that since the agreement provided compensation at the rate of Rs. 3 per square foot per month for
delayed possession, the purchasers were not entitled to anything in addition. Dealing with the
submission, this Court observed:
“9. We are in agreement with the view of the NCDRC that the rate which has been
stipulated by the developer, of compensation at the rate of 3 per sq. ft. per month
does not provide just or reasonable recompense to a flat buyer who 2019 SCC OnLine
SC 224 has invested money and has not been handed over possession as on the
stipulated date of 31 January 2014. To take a simple illustration, a flat buyer with an
agreement of a flat admeasuring a 1000 sq. ft. would receive, under the agreement,
not more than Rs. 3000/- per month. This in a city such as Bangalore does not
provide just or adequate compensation. The jurisdiction of the NCDRC to award just
compensation under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 cannot in
the circumstances be constrained by the terms of the agreement. The agreement in its
view is one sided and does not provide sufficient recompense to the flat purchasers.”
The Court observed that there was a delay of two years and hence the award of
interest at the rate of 6 per cent was reasonable and justified.
28 In Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Limited v. Govindan Raghavan19, there
was a delay of almost two years in obtaining an occupancy certificate after the date
stipulated in the ABA. As a consequence, there was a failure to provide possession of
the flat to the purchaser within a reasonable period. This Court dwelt on the terms of
the ABA under which the builder was entitled to charge interest at 18 per cent per
annum for the delay in payment of instalments by the purchaser. On the other hand,
the failure to provide possession on the part of the developer was subject to a grace
period of twelve months followed by a termination notice of ninety days and a further
period of ninety days to the developer to effect a refund. Adverting to these clauses,
the court noted:
“6.4. A perusal of the apartment buyer's agreement dated 8-5- 2012 reveals stark
incongruities between the remedies available to both the parties. For instance, Clause
6.4(ii) of the agreement entitles the appellant builder to charge interest (2019) 5 SCC
725 @18% p.a. on account of any delay in payment of instalments from the
respondent flat purchaser. Clause 6.4(iii) of the agreement entitles the appellant
builder to cancel the allotment and terminate the agreement, if any instalment
remains in arrears for more than 30 days. On the other hand, as per Clause 11.5 of the
agreement, if the appellant builder fails to deliver possession of the apartment within
the stipulated period, the respondent flat purchaser has to wait for a period of 12
months after the end of the grace period, before serving a termination notice of 90
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
14

--- PAGE 15 ---

days on the appellant builder, and even thereafter, the appellant builder gets 90 days
to refund only the actual instalment paid by the respondent flat purchaser, after
adjusting the taxes paid, interest and penalty on delayed payments. In case of any
delay thereafter, the appellant builder is liable to pay interest @9% p.a. only.
6.5. Another instance is Clause 23.4 of the agreement which entitles the appellant builder to serve a
termination notice upon the respondent flat purchaser for breach of any contractual obligation. If
the respondent flat purchaser fails to rectify the default within 30 days of the termination notice,
then the agreement automatically stands cancelled, and the appellant builder has the right to forfeit
the entire amount of earnest money towards liquidated damages. On the other hand, as per Clause
11.5(v) of the agreement, if the respondent flat purchaser fails to exercise his right of termination
within the time limit provided in Clause 11.5, then he shall not be entitled to terminate the
agreement thereafter, and shall be bound by the provisions of the agreement.” Justice Indu
Malhotra speaking for the Court noted:
“6.8. A term of a contract will not be final and binding if it is shown that the flat
purchasers had no option but to sign on the dotted line, on a contract framed by the
builder. The contractual terms of the agreement dated 8-5-2012 are ex facie
one-sided, unfair and unreasonable. The incorporation of such one-sided clauses in
an agreement constitutes an unfair trade practice as per Section 2(1)(r) of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 since it adopts unfair methods or practices for the
purpose of selling the flats by the builder.” The Court observed that in these
circumstances, the flat purchasers could not be compelled to obtain possession which
was offered almost two years after the grace period under the agreement had expired.
Hence, the NCDRC was held to have correctly awarded interest at the rate of 10
percent per annum.
29 The decision of this Court in Dhanda20 has been relied upon by learned Senior
Counsel appearing on behalf of the developer as elucidating the principle that where
a flat buyersƒ agreement stipulates a consequence for delayed possession,
exceptional and strong reasons must be established before the forum constituted
under the Act of 1986 awards compensation in addition to what has been
contractually agreed. In Dhanda’s case, the SCDRC issued a direction for handing
over physical possession of the residential unit to the complainant and for execution
of a sale deed. In addition, compensation was awarded by way of interest at the rate
of 12 per cent per annum with effect from twelve months after the stipulated date
under the agreement. In an appeal by the developer, the NCDRC directed that the
rate of interest for a house building loan for the corresponding period in a scheduled
nationalised bank would be appropriate and if a floating rate of interest was
prescribed, the higher rate of interest should be taken for the computation. A sum of
Rs. 1 lac per annum from the date for handing over possession to the actual date of
possession was regarded as appropriate in the facts of the case. In that case under the
terms of the buyerƒs agreements, possession was to be delivered within twenty-four
months of the execution of the agreement i.e. 10 February 2013 – failing which the
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
15

--- PAGE 16 ---

developer was liable to pay compensation at the rate of Rs. 10 per square foot per
month for the delay. The developer contended that construction activities were
delayed as a result of an injunction granted by this Court over a period of eight
months 2019 SCC OnLine SC 689 and consequently sought an extension of the
period for handing over possession by one year. Alternatively, the developer offered
to refund the money deposited with interest at 9 per cent per annum. Construction of
258 independent floors was completed while about 1,500 units were nearing
completion. In two sets of Civil Appeals which came up before this Court earlier,
agreed terms were arrived at providing for the award of interest at 9 per cent per
annum from the date of deposit till refund. While considering the order of the
NCDRC, this Court observed:
“16. The District Forum under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is empowered
inter-alia to order the opposite party to pay such amount as may be awarded as
compensation to the consumer for any loss or injury suffered by the consumer due to
the negligence of the opposite party including to grant punitive damages. But the
forums under the Act cannot award interest and/or compensation by applying rule of
thumb. The order to grant interest at the maximum of rate of interest charged by
nationalised bank for advancing home loan is arbitrary and no nexus with the default
committed. The appellant has agreed to deliver constructed flats. For delay in
handing over possession, the consumer is entitled to the consequences agreed at the
time of executing buyer's agreement. There cannot be multiple heads to grant of
damages and interest when the parties have agreed for payment of damages at the
rate of Rs. 10/- per sq. ft. per month. Once the parties agreed for a particular
consequence of delay in handing over of possession then, there has to be exceptional
and strong reasons for the SCDRC/NCDRC to award compensation at more than the
agreed rate.” 30 The orders of the SCDRC and NCDRC were held to be without any
foundation being led by the complainant and based purely on a “rule of thumb”.
The court noted that the amount of interest represents compensation to the beneficiaries who are
deprived of the use of the investment which has been made and will take into its ambit the
consequence of a delay in not handing over possession. The court held that both the SCDRC and
NCDRC awarded compensation under different heads on account of a singular default of not
handing over possession. This was held not to be sustainable. The court held that:
“19. Thus, we find that the complainant is entitled to interest from the Appellant for
not handing over possession as projected as is offered by it but it is not a case to
award special punitive damages as one of the causes for late delivery of possession
was beyond the control of the Appellant. Therefore, in view of the settlement
proposal submitted by the Appellant in earlier two set of appeals in respect of same
project, and to settle any further controversy, the Appellant is directed as follows:
i) To send a copy of the occupation certificate to the Complainants along with offer of
possession. The Appellant shall also direct the Jones Lang LaSalle - the real estate
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
16

--- PAGE 17 ---

maintenance agency, engaged by the Appellant to undertake such maintenance works
as is necessary on account of damage due to non-occupation of the flats after
construction etc.
ii) It shall be open to the Complainants to seek the assistance of the maintenance
agency to attend to the maintenance work which may arise on account of
non-occupation or on account of natural vagaries.
iii) Such maintenance work shall be completed by the Appellant within two months of
the offer of possession but the payment of interest at the rate of 9 per cent per annum
will be for a period of two months from the date of offer of possession in all
situations.
v) Since the Complainants have been forced to invoke jurisdiction of the consumer
forums, they shall be entitled to consolidated amount of Rs. 50,000/- in each
complaint on all accounts such as mental agony and litigation expenses etc. The
complainant shall not be entitled to any other amount over and above the amount
mentioned above.
vi) In case, the original allottee has transferred the flat, the transferee shall be
entitled to interest at the rate of 9 per cent per annum from the date of expiry of three
years from the agreement or from the date of transfer, whichever is later.” 31 The
judgment in Dhanda’s case does not prescribe an absolute embargo on the award of
compensation beyond the rate stipulated in the flat buyersƒ agreement where
handing over of the possession of a flat has been delayed.
Dhanda’s case was preceded by consent terms which were presented before this Court in two earlier
civil appeals under which interest at the rate of 9 per cent had been granted. The decision lays down
that the award of interest cannot be arbitrary and without nexus to the default which has been
committed. Hence, the award of interest at the maximum rate of interest charged by a nationalised
bank for advancing home loans was construed to be arbitrary. It was in this context that the court
observed that the parties having agreed to a consequence for delay, exceptional and strong reasons
must exist for the consumer fora to depart from the agreed rate. The decision, in other words, does
not lay down that there is an absence of jurisdiction in the adjudicatory fora constituted under the
CP Act 1986 to award remedial compensation to a flat buyer for the delay of the developer in
handing over possession on the agreed date. 32 In the present case, there exist, clear and valid
reasons for not holding down the flat buying consumers merely to the entitlement to receive
compensation at the rate of 5 per square foot per month in terms of clause 14 of the ABA:
(i) There has been a breach on the part of the developer in complying with the
contractual obligation to hand over possession of the flats within a period of thirty-six
months of the date of the agreement as stipulated in clause 11(a);
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
17

--- PAGE 18 ---

(ii) The failure of the developer to hand over possession within the contractually
stipulated period amounts to a deficiency of service within the meaning of Section 2
(1) (g), warranting the invocation of the jurisdiction vested in the NCDRC to issue a
direction for the removal of the deficiency in service;
(iii) The triggering of an obligation to pay compensation on the existence of delay in
handing over possession is admitted by the developer for, even according to it, it has
adjusted compensation at the agreed rate of Rs 5 per square foot per month to 145
out of the 171 appellants;
(iv) The agreement is manifestly one-sided: the rights provided to the developer for a
default on the part of the home buyer are not placed on an equal platform with the
contractual right provided to the home buyer in the case of a default by the
developer;
(v) There has been a gross delay on the part of the developer in completing
construction ranging between two and four years. Despite successive extensions of
time to deliver possession sought by the developer, possession was not delivered on
time;
(vi) The nature and quantum of the delay on the part of the developer are of such a
nature that the measure of compensation which is provided in clause 14 of the ABA
would not provide sufficient recompense to the purchasers; and
(vii) Judicial notice ought to be taken of the fact that a flat purchaser who is left in the
lurch as a result of the failure of the developer to provide possession within the
contractually stipulated date suffers consequences in terms of agony and hardship,
not the least of which is financial in nature. Having paid a substantial amount of the
purchase price to the developer and being required to service the debt towards loan
installments the purchaser is unable to obtain timely possession of the flat which is
the subject matter of the ABA.
But, it has been submitted by the developer – a submission which found acceptance by the NCDRC
– that the execution of the Deed of Conveyance by a flat purchaser precludes a consumer claim
being raised for delayed possession. During the course of the proceedings before the NCDRC, the
flat purchasers relied upon the communications which were issued by the developer to demonstrate
that the purchasers were not permitted by the developer to execute a Deed of Conveyance or to take
possession under protest. The material which was produced before the NCDRC supports this
submission, which was urged before the Court by Mr Prashant Bhushan, learned Counsel. By a
communication dated 16 February 2016, the developer informed a flat buyer that in terms of the
ABA, the allottee is required to take possession of the apartment by making payments and executing
documentation after the developer has obtained a certificate for occupation from the competent
authority and has offered possession of the apartment to the allottee. The developer stated:
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
18

--- PAGE 19 ---

“We may also like to bring to your notice, that if the acceptance of offer of possession
terms is being conveyed by the allottee under protest the Company will not be in a
position to hand over the possession and execute the Conveyance Deed and as such
your request to take over the possession and execute the documents under protest is
untenable.”
33 By an email dated 24 December 2016, another flat buyer was informed that:
“It would be a pleasure to progress with possession once you submit the affidavit.
However we can't accept any documents to this effect under protest or claim of
coercion. This affidavit has to be unconditionally submitted and possession taken.”
By another communication dated 21 December 2016, a flat purchaser was informed
that:
“It was explained to you in our FDN itself and our earlier reply/clarifications, that
any kind of protest 'is not tenable if you wish to take possession and register the
property as well. Kindly execute the affidavit as advised and proceed for further
process on registering the property.” By a communication dated 1 December 2016,
the developer informed a flat purchaser that “Your letter that you took possession
and executed the documents under protest is untenable and unacceptable and the
company will not be in a position to execute the conveyance deed under protest.”
Copies of these communications are marked as Annexures P-28, P-29, P-30 and P-31
to Civil Appeal 6239 of 2019.
34 The developer has not disputed these communications. Though these are four communications
issued by the developer, the appellants submitted that they are not isolated aberrations but fit into a
pattern. The developer does not state that it was willing to offer the flat purchasers possession of
their flats and the right to execute conveyance of the flats while reserving their claim for
compensation for delay. On the contrary, the tenor of the communications indicates that while
executing the Deeds of Conveyance, the flat buyers were informed that no form of protest or
reservation would be acceptable. The flat buyers were essentially presented with an unfair choice of
either retaining their right to pursue their claims (in which event they would not get possession or
title in the meantime) or to forsake the claims in order to perfect their title to the flats for which they
had paid valuable consideration. In this backdrop, the simple question which we need to address is
whether a flat buyer who seeks to espouse a claim against the developer for delayed possession can
as a consequence of doing so be compelled to defer the right to obtain a conveyance to perfect their
title. It would, in our view, be manifestly unreasonable to expect that in order to pursue a claim for
compensation for delayed handing over of possession, the purchaser must indefinitely defer
obtaining a conveyance of the premises purchased or, if they seek to obtain a Deed of Conveyance to
forsake the right to claim compensation. This basically is a position which the NCDRC has espoused.
We cannot countenance that view.
35 The flat purchasers invested hard earned money. It is only reasonable to presume that the next
logical step is for the purchaser to perfect the title to the premises which have been allotted under
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
19

--- PAGE 20 ---

the terms of the ABA. But the submission of the developer is that the purchaser forsakes the remedy
before the consumer forum by seeking a Deed of Conveyance. To accept such a construction would
lead to an absurd consequence of requiring the purchaser either to abandon a just claim as a
condition for obtaining the conveyance or to indefinitely delay the execution of the Deed of
Conveyance pending protracted consumer litigation.
36 It has been urged by the learned counsel of the developer that a consequence of the execution of
the Deed of Conveyance in the present case is that the same ceases to be a transaction in the nature
of “supply of services” covered under the CP Act 1986 and becomes a mere sale of immovable
property which is not amenable to the jurisdiction of Consumer Fora. In Narne Construction (P)
Ltd. v. Union of India21, this Court distinguished between a simple transfer of a piece of immovable
property and housing construction or building activity carried out by a private or statutory body
falling in the category of „serviceƒ within the meaning of Section 2 (1) (o) of the CP Act 1986. This
Court held that:
“8. Having regard to the nature of transaction between the appellant Company and
its customers involved much more than a simple transfer of a piece of immovable
property it is clear the same constitutes “service” within the meaning of the Act. It
was not the case that the appellant Company was selling the given property with all
its advantages and/or disadvantages on “as is where is” basis, as was the position in
UT Chandigarh Admn v. Amarjeet Singh. It is a case where a clear-cut assurance was
made to the purchasers as to the nature and extent of development that would be
carried out by the appellant Company as a part of package under which a sale of fully
developed plots with assured facilities was made in favour of the purchasers for
valuable consideration. To the extent the transfer of site with developments in the
manner and to the extent indicated earlier was a part of the (2012) 5 SCC 359
transaction, the appellant Company has indeed undertaken to provide a service. Any
deficiency or defect in such service would make it accountable before the competent
Consumer Forum at the instance of consumers like the respondents.” The developer
in the present case has undertaken to provide a service in the nature of developing
residential flats with certain amenities and remains amenable to the jurisdiction of
the Consumer Fora. Consequently, we are unable to subscribe to the view of the
NCDRC that flat purchasers who obtained possession or executed Deeds of
Conveyance have lost their right to make a claim for compensation for the delayed
handing over of the flats.
37 However, the cases of the eleven purchasers who entered into specific settlement deeds with the
developers have to be segregated. In the case of these eleven persons, we are of the view that it
would be appropriate if their cases are excluded from the purview of the present order. These eleven
flat purchasers having entered into specific deeds of settlement, it would be only appropriate and
proper if they are held down to the terms of the bargain. We are not inclined to accept the
contention of the learned counsel of the appellants, Mr. Prashant Bhushan, that the settlement
deeds were executed under coercion or undue influence since no specific material has been
produced on record to demonstrate the same.
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
20

--- PAGE 21 ---

38 Similarly, the three appellants who have transferred their title, right and interest in the
apartments would not be entitled to the benefit of the present order since they have sold their
interest in the apartments to third parties. The written submissions which have been filed before
this Court indicate that “the two buyers stepped into the shoes of the first buyers” as a result of the
assignment of rights and liabilities by the first buyer in favour of the second buyer. In HUDA v. Raje
Ram22, this Court while holding that a claim of compensation for delayed possession by subsequent
transferees is unsustainable, observed that:
“7. Respondents in the three appeals are not the original allottees. They are
re-allottees to whom re-allotment was made by the appellant in the years 1994, 1997
and 1996 respectively. They were aware, when the plots were re- allotted to them,
that there was delay (either in forming the layout itself or delay in delivering the
allotted plot on account of encroachment etc). In spite of it, they took re-allotment.
Their cases cannot be compared to cases of original allottees who were made to wait
for a decade or more for delivery and thus put to mental agony and harassment. They
were aware that time for performance was not stipulated as the essence of the
contract and the original allottees had accepted the delay.” Even if the three
appellants who had transferred their interest in the apartments had continued to
agitate on the issue of delay of possession, we are not inclined to accept the
submission that the subsequent transferees can step into the shoes of the original
buyer for the purpose of benefiting from this order. The subsequent transferees in
spite of being aware of the delay in delivery of possession the flats, had purchased the
interest in the apartments from the original buyers. Further, it cannot be said that the
subsequent transferees suffered any agony and harassment comparable to that of the
first buyers, as a result of the delay in the delivery of possession in order to be
entitled to compensation.
(2008) 17 SCC 407 Amenities
39 The brochure that was issued by the developers spoke of a “Distinctive DLF Living” while
advertising the project, which was described as “DLF Westend Heights”, New Town. This was
described as “the premier choice for Bangalore living…a premium residential enclave featuring
spacious apartments with a rich selection of amenities.” Westend Heights at New Town was
described as a project which was being developed on a land area of 27.5 acres. The brochure
specifically referred to the amenities being provided. Among them were (i) “The most exclusive club
in Bangalore”; (ii) a swimming pool; (iii) gymnasium/ aerobics centre; and (iv) a restaurant and Bar
together with other sports facilities. Besides this, the brochure contained a representation of the
setting up of a convenience shopping centre with an array of outlets, a renowned early - learning
school and state of the art health care facilities. Clause 1.10(a) of the ABA, which imposes the
liability to bear taxes on the allottees states that this liability will be proportionate to the ratio of the
super area of the apartment to the total super area of all the apartments and other “shops, clubs etc”
in the said complex. The grievance in regard to the alleged failure of the developer to provide
amenities may be divided into two segments:
     (i)       The club house; and
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
21

--- PAGE 22 ---

     (ii)      Other amenities
Club house
40          The developer has stated before the court that a club house containing
appurtenant facilities including a swimming pool, gymnasium, billiards room, tennis court, indoor
badminton court, squash court and community hall has been fully constructed and an occupation
certificate has been received on 13 May 2019. The developer has stated that under the building
regulations, it has to handover 5 per cent of the area of the group housing complex to BDA as a civic
amenities (“CA”) area. The RWA has to apply to BDA for allotment of the CA area in its favour.
Upon allotment, the RWA hands over the area to the builder for construction of the club. The
developer relinquished the CA area in favour of the BDA, constituted an RWA and applied to BDA
on 22 June 2010 for the allotment of the CA site in favour of the RWA. The written submissions
indicate that a dispute over the charges demanded by BDA towards lease rent led to a writ petition
before the Karnataka High Court being instituted both by the developer and the RWA which was
allowed on 29 June 2015. The developer submitted a building plan to the municipal body. A second
writ petition had to be filed in which the High Court on 18 October 2016 directed the municipal
body to proceed with the approval of the building plans. Sanction for the building plan was received
on 18 May 2017 and after construction of the club building, an occupation certificate was received
on 13 May 2019. The developer has stated that it has been following up with BDA to permit them to
hand over possession and management of the club to the RWA. Since permission of BDA has still
not been received legal action is contemplated again. The developer has produced photographs
depicting the amenities which have been provided within the precincts of the club house.
Membership fees for the club are stated to have been received in the account of the RWA and not in
the account of the developer. The position which has been stated before the court as elucidated
above has not been disputed by counsel for the appellants. Hence, we find that there has been no
breach by the developer of the obligation to provide a constructed facility of a club for the RWA.
Other amenities 41 As regards the other amenities, the defence of the developer is that these were to
be developed as an integral element of the entire township of 80 acres of which the project
admeasuring 27 acres (comprised in Westend Heights) was a part. The ABA stipulates that allottees
of the complex have no right, title and interest in respect of the amenities or facilities outside the
residential complex, which lie within the larger township. According to the developer, no part of the
consideration which was paid by allottees, including the appellants, was towards the amenities and
facilities falling outside the boundary of the complex. In this regard, the developer relies on the
following stipulation accepted by allottees under clause 5 of the Booking Application Form:
“The applicant confirms and represents that he has not made any payment to the
Company in any manner whatsoever and that the Company has not indicated /
premised / represented / given any impression of any kind in an explicit or implicit
manner whatsoever, that the Applicant shall have any right, title or interest of any in
whatsoever in any lands, buildings, common areas, facilities and amenities failing
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
22

--- PAGE 23 ---

outside the Said Complex…” The above stipulation is reiterated under clause 1.21 of
the ABA:
“The allottee acknowledges and confirms that the allottee is not entitled to or has not
paid for the lands outside the said land/said complex whether the same is within said
project or other. The said project would comprise of many complexes similar on
different to said complex. Allottee has not paid any amount towards any other lands,
areas, facilities and amenities including but not limited to those listed below, and as
such, the allottee shall have no right interest of any nature whatsoever in the same
and the same are specifically excluded from the scope of this agreement. The allottee
acknowledges that the ownership of such land and facilities and amenities shall vest
solely with the company/LDC and its associate companies subsidiaries and they
alone shall have sole right and absolute authority to deal with the same including
their usage and manner/method of use, disposal etc. creation of rights in favour of
other person by way of sale, transfer, lease Joint venture, collaboration or any other
including transfer of government, semi-government, any other person. "
42 Now, it is correct as the developer contends that the flat purchasers have no right, title or interest
in respect of the amenities which were to be constructed by the developer as a part of the larger
township of New Town. The entire area comprised 80 acres of which Westend Heights was situated
on 27 acres. The absence of a title or interest in the flat purchasers in the amenities to be provided
outside the area of 27 acres begs the question as to whether there was a breach of a clear
representation which was held out to the flat purchasers by the developer. A deficiency under
Section 2(1)(g) means a fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature and
manner of performance. This may be required to be maintained under law or may be undertaken to
be performed in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service. The builder invited
prospective flat purchasers to invest in the project of Westend Heights on the basis of a clear
representation that the surrounding area of New Town situated on 80 acres was being developed to
provide a wide range of amenities including a shopping centre, health care facilities and an early
learning school. The developer has failed to provide these amenities. In the reply, the developer has
stated that:
“It is stated that School, Commercial Complex and Health clinic are part of the
facility which will be provided upon the completion of the Whole New Town project
as these facilities, with existing population cannot sustain these facilities. Every
matter has to be adjudicated in light of its own facts and circumstance…” In the
written submissions of the developer, the failure to provide the amenities is sought to
be glossed over by contending that:
“…the issue of these facilities has since become completely academic since the area
around the DLF Township has already become totally urbanized and well developed
thanks in larger measure due to the DLFƒs activities in the area and there are now
many proximate hospitals, schools, shopping areas that have mushroomed in the
immediate vicinity and neighbourhood of the DLF Township which are in fact being
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
23

--- PAGE 24 ---

regularly and conveniently used by the residents of the DLF residential complex
which include the Appellants herein. As such, there is no loss or claim for any
damages that could be said to have accrued to the Appellants either under the ABA or
otherwise under this alleged head of claim.”
43 In other words, what the developer holds out as a defence is that though there has been a failure
on their part to provide the amenities, the flat buyers have the benefit of facilities in the surrounding
area which has become urbanised. We cannot agree with this line of submissions. The reply of the
developer seeks to explain the failure to construct the facilities on the ground that the “existing
population cannot sustain these facilities” – a school, commercial complex and health care facilities.
This is a case involving an experienced developer who knew the nature of the representation which
was being held out to the flat purchasers. Developers sell dreams to home buyers. Implicit in their
representations is that the facilities which will be developed by the developer will provide
convenience of living and a certain lifestyle based on the existence of those amenities. Having sold
the flats, the developer may find it economically unviable to provide the amenities. The flat
purchasers cannot be left in the lurch or, as in the present case, be told that the absence of facilities
which were to be provided by the developer is compensated by other amenities which are available
in the area. The developer must be held accountable to its representation. A flat purchaser who
invests in a flat does so on an assessment of its potential. The amenities which the builder has
committed to provide impinge on the quality of life for the families of purchasers and the potential
for appreciation in the value of the flat. The representation held out by the developer cannot be
dismissed as chaff. True, in a situation such as the present it may be difficult for the court to
quantify the exact nature of the compensation that should be provided to the flat buyers. The
general appreciation in land values results in an increase in the value of the investment made by the
buyers. Difficulties in determining the measure of compensation cannot however dilute the liability
to pay. A developer who has breached a clear representation which has been made to the buyers of
the amenities which will be provided to them should be held accountable to the process of law. To
allow the developer to escape their obligation would put a premium on false assurances and
representations made to the flat purchasers. Hence, in factoring in the compensation which should
be provided to the flat buyers who are concerned in the present batch of appeals, we would
necessarily have to bear this issue in mind.
Tax 44 The ABA contained specific provisions in regard to the payment of taxes. Clause 1.3 of the
ABA provided:
“1.3 The Allottee shall make the payment of the Total price as per the payment plan
set out in annexure -III of this Agreement. Other charges, securities, payments etc.
(as specified in this Agreement), Taxes and increase thereof (as provided in clause
1.10) shall be payable by the Allottee, as and when demanded by the Company.”
Clause 1.10 contained a specific provision in regard to the obligation of the allottee to
pay taxes in addition to the total price. Clause 1.10 provided:
“1.10. The Allottee agrees and understands that in addition to Total price, the Allottee
shall be liable to pay the Taxes, which shall be charged and paid as under:
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
24

--- PAGE 25 ---

a) A sum equivalent to the proportionate share of Taxes shall be paid by the Allottee
to the Company. The Proportionate share shall be the ratio of the Super Area of the
said Apartment to the total super area of all the apartments other buildings shop,
club etc. in the said complex.
b) The Company shall periodically intimate to the Allottee herein, on the basis of
certificates from a Chartered Engineer and /or a Chartered· Accountant, the amount
payable as stated above which shall be final and binding on the Allottee and the
Allottee shall make payment of such amount within 30 (thirty days) of such
intimation.” The ABA also contains the following provisions:
“2. Payment for taxes on land, wealth-tax, cesses etc. by Allottee: -
The Allottee agrees and confirms to pay all Government rates, tax on land, municipal
tax, property taxes, wealth tax, Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare
Fund (Cess),taxes, one time building tax, luxury tax if any, fees or levies of all and any
kind by whatever name called, whether levied or Leviable now or in future by the
Government or municipal authority or any other governmental authority on the Said
Complex and I or the Said Building or land appurtenant thereto as the case may be as
assessable or applicable from the date of the Application if the Said Apartment is
assessed separately and if the Said Apartment is not assessed separately then the
Allottee shall pay directly to the concerned authority and if the same is levied on or
paid by the Company or the Allottee then the same shall be borne and paid by the
Allottee on pro-rata basis and such determination of proportionate share by the
Company and demand shall be final and binding on the Allottee. However, if the Said
Apartment is assessed separately the Allottee shall pay directly to the Government
Authority.
3. Amount paid by Allottee with Application The Allottee has paid a sum of Rs.
3,00,000/- (Rupees 3 Lakhs only) alongwith the Application, the receipt of which the
Company doth hereby acknowledge and the Allottee agrees to pay the remaining
price of the Said Apartment as prescribed in schedule of payments (Annexure-III)
attached with this Agreement along with all other charges, Taxes, securities etc. as
mentioned in this Agreement and as per the de-mand raised by the Company in
accordance with the Agreement.” The ABA contains the definition of taxes in the
following terms:
“"Taxes" shall mean any and all taxes payable by the Company/LOC and/or its
contractors, suppliers, consultants, etc. by way of value added tax (VAT), state sales
tax, central sales tax, works contract tax, service tax, cess, levies and educational cess
and any other taxes levies, charges by whatever name called levied and collected by
Government Agency in connection with Development / construction of the Said
Apartment/Said Building/Said Complex.” The expression total price is also defined in
the ABA so as to be exclusive inter alia of taxes.
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
25

--- PAGE 26 ---

45 The two certificates of the Chartered Accountant issued on 26 July 2013 and 9 August 2014
indicate that taxes inclusive of interest have been recovered. According to the appellants, the builder
admitted that it had “not properly discharged” his liability towards taxes for a period of thirty-six
months between 2011-2012 and 2013-2014 and that tax dues were paid on 25 March 2015 together
with penalty and interest. Hence, it has been urged that the liability to pay interest which arose on
account of the default of the developer in discharging the tax liability on time cannot be fastened
upon the buyers. 46 On behalf of the developer it has been submitted that when construction
commenced in 2009, there was an absence of clarity on whether works contract tax was liable to be
paid in relation to agreements between owners-developers and allottees of apartments where the
apartments were to be delivered in future. In 2013, this Court delivered its judgment in Larsen and
Toubro Limited v State of Karnataka23 as a result of which the liability towards works contract tax
was adjudicated upon. Consequently, while computing the amount payable in the final statements of
accounts, the developer passed on the interest burden but not the penalty on a proportionate basis
in terms of clause 1.10. The allottees were required to pay their proportionate share of the works
contract tax in terms of the ABA and the final demand was raised at the time of the offer of
possession. 47 The specific conditions contained in the ABA clearly imposed the liability to bear the
proportionate share of taxes on the purchasers. Clauses 1.3 and 1.10 leave no manner of doubt in
regard to the position. The developer has offered an explanation of why as a result of pending
litigation, the dues towards works contract tax were not paid earlier. Indeed, if they were paid
earlier, the purchasers would have been required to reimburse their proportionate share of (2014) 1
SCC 708 taxes earlier as well. No part of the penalty imposed on the developer has been passed on to
the purchasers. In view of the terms of the ABA and the explanation which has been submitted by
the developer, there is no deficiency of service in regard to the demand of interest payable on the tax
which was required to be deposited with the revenue.
Electricity 48 The submission by Mr. R. Balasubramanian, learned Senior Counsel is that the initial
collection of Rs. 1.50 lacs from each buyer towards BESCOM /BWSSB charges for electricity and
water are admitted. Subsequently, invoking clause 23(b) of the ABA, the developer collected two lacs
from each buyer towards additional electricity charges. The appellants contest the entitlement of the
developer to claim these charges.
Clause 23(b) of the ABA is in the following terms:
“23. (b) Payments and other charges for bulk supply of electrical energy If Company
or the Maintenance Agency decides to apply for and thereafter receives permission
from BESCOM or from any other body / commission/ regulator/ licensing authority
constituted by the Government of Karnataka for such purpose, to receive and
distribute bulk supply of electrical energy in the Said Project/Said Complex then the
Allottee undertakes to pay on demand to the Company proportionate share as may be
determined by the Company of all payments and charges paid/ payable by the
Company or the Maintenance Agency to BESCOM…The proportionate share of cost
incurred by the Company for creating infrastructure like HT feeder, EHT sub stations
etc shall also be payable by the Allottee on demand.”
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
26

--- PAGE 27 ---

49 According to the developer, initially an electricity connection was provided by BESCOM without
insisting on the requirement of an electric sub-station. Subsequently as occupation certificates were
received for additional towers, BESCOM required a dedicated electric sub-station which was
constructed by the developer at a cost of Rs. 18.01 crores. The pro rata cost for setting up this
additional infrastructure was, according to the developer, payable by the allottees. When offers for
possession were issued to the buyers, the following stipulation was contained in the letter:
“Our initial effort was to obtain and energize the power supply to the entire project of
1830 apartments through individual ll KV feeders from Golahalli 66/llKV Substation.
On this basis, the costing for infrastructure towards provisioning of utilities as per
clause 1.14, 1.15, 23(b) and JDC of ABA was estimated at rate Rs. 127.96/sft., which
was reflected in the Final Demand to D Block customers. However, after a detailed
evaluation of the load requirement for the project as per norms, BESCOM has now
stipulated that, in accordance with clause 3.2.4 of KERC Regulations, we establish a
dedicated 66/11 kv Substation within our project site to cater to the needs of the
project, instead of the earlier proposed scheme of 11 Kv feeders from Golahalli. The
increase in cost because of this new sub-station and allied works, over and above the
originally envisaged 11KV scheme is estimated @Rs. 18.01 Cr., thereby increasing the
total infrastructure cost recovery towards provisioning of utilities to Rs. 188.00/sft.
In view of the above said amounts are being recovered on the basis of provisional
estimates. On commissioning and energizing the substation, the company shall
arrange a certificate from independent chartered accountant/ chartered engineer to
arrive at the actual cost incurred. Your share of the said actual cost by the Company
shall be duly intimated to you accordingly. If it is found that excess amount paid by
you, over and above the actual cost incurred by the company, said excess amount so
collected shall be refunded to you without interest. If the actual expenses exceeds the
estimated amount computed @Rs.
188/-sq. ft. then demand for the shortfall amount shall be raised through further demand on the
owner of the property and shall be payable by you. We would further like to bring to your kind
attention that the provision of 66/llKV substation will ensure better quality uninterrupted power
supply as compared with the previously planned scheme of 11KVƒreeders.” 50 Mr. R.
Balasubramanian, learned Senior Counsel contends that clause 23(b) relates to receiving and
distributing the bulk supply of electrical energy to “the said project /said complex” which is defined
as “project under the name and style of “New Town DLF BTM Extension”. According to the
submission, the charges have been collected for the entire New Town project and not for Westend
Heights alone. In this context it has also been submitted that distribution of electricity is governed
by the KERC Regulations 2006. While planning the project, the developer calculated the cost of the
66/11 KV sub-station and collected charges from each of the 1830 buyers. Hence, it has been
submitted that there was no requirement of additional bulk supply of electricity for the nineteen
hundred buyers. In this context, the formulation in the written submissions is extracted below:
“(under) regulation 3.02 (e) of KERC (Conditions of Supply of Electricity by the
Distribution Licensee) Regulations 2004, it is mandatory to set up 66 KV supply line/
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
27

--- PAGE 28 ---

KV substation if the demands goes beyond 7500 KVA. Further under regulation 3.2.4
KERC (Recovery of Expenditure for Supply of Electricity) Regulations 2004 : “In case
of layouts/buildings requiring power supply and the requisitioned load is more than
7500 KVA, the developer/ Applicant shall provide the space for erection of
sub-station and also bear the entire charges of such a sub-station and associated
lines/equipments. The work shall be carried out either by the Licensee duly
recovering the charges as per estimate or by the Applicant himself through
appropriate class of licensed contractor by paying 10% of the estimate as supervision
charges to the Licensee.”
51 The NCDRC has upheld the collection of the charges towards electricity based on the terms of the
ABA. There is no infirmity in the finding of the NCDRC, which is based on the provisions contained
in clause 23(b) of the ABA. The charges recovered are not contrary to what was specified in the
contract between the parties.
Parking 52 The appellants seek a refund of an amount of Rs. 2.25 lacs collected from each buyer
towards car parking. The submission is that under Section 3(f) of the Karnataka Apartment
Ownership Act 197224 , common areas and facilities include parking areas. According to the
appellants, the flat buyers had already paid for the super area in terms of clause 1.6 of ABA including
common areas and facilities which would be deemed to include car parking under the KAO Act. The
relevant portion of clause 1.6 is extracted below:
“1.6. The Allottee agrees that the Total price of the said Apartment is calculated on
the basis of its Super Area only (as indicated in clause 1.1.) except the parking space,
additional car parking space which are based on fixed valuation…."(emphasis
supplied)
53 We are unable to accede to the above submission. The ABA contained a break-up of the total
price of the apartment. Parking charges for exclusive use of earmarked parking spaces were
separately included in the break-up. The parking charges were revealed to the flat buyers in the
brochure. The charges recovered are in terms of the agreement.
54 The decision of this Court in Nahalchand Laloochand Private Limited v.
“KAO Act” Panchali Cooperative Housing Society Limited25 turned on the provisions of the
Maharashtra Ownership Flats Act 1971, as explained in the subsequent decision of this Court in DLF
Limited v. Manmohan Lowe26. The demand of parking charges is in terms of the ABA and hence it
is not possible to accede to the submission that there was a deficiency of service under this head. 55
For the above reasons we have come to the conclusion that the dismissal of the complaint by the
NCDRC was erroneous. The flat buyers are entitled to compensation for delayed handing over of
possession and for the failure of the developer to fulfil the representations made to flat buyers in
regard to the provision of amenities. The reasoning of the NCDRC on these facets suffers from a
clear perversity and patent errors of law which have been noticed in the earlier part of this
judgment. Allowing the appeals in part, we set aside the impugned judgment and order of the
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
28

--- PAGE 29 ---

NCDRC dated 2 July 2019 dismissing the consumer complaint. While doing so, we issue the
following directions:
(i) Save and except for eleven appellants who entered into specific settlements with
the developer and three appellants who have sold their right, title and interest under
the ABA, the first and second respondents shall, as a measure of compensation, pay
an amount calculated at the rate of 6 per cent simple interest per annum to each of
the appellants.
The amount shall be computed on the total amounts paid towards the purchase of the respective
flats with effect from the date of expiry of thirty-six months from the execution of the respective
ABAs until the (2010) 9 SCC 536 (2014) 12 SCC 231 date of the offer of possession after the receipt
of the occupation certificate;
(ii) The above amount shall be in addition to the amounts which have been paid over or credited by
the developer at the rate of Rs 5 per square foot per month at the time of the drawing of final
accounts; and
(iii) The amounts due and payable in terms of directions (i) and (ii) above shall be paid over within a
period of one month from the date of this judgment failing which they shall carry interest at the rate
of 9 per cent per annum until payment.
56 The civil appeals are accordingly allowed in the above terms. 57 Pending application(s), if any,
shall stand disposed of.
…….………….…………………...........................J. [Dr. Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]
…….…………………………...............................J. [K M Joseph] New Delhi;
August 24, 2020.
Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan And Aleya ... vs Dlf Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd. (Now Known ... on 24 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161155740/
29