--- PAGE 1 ---

National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
 NCDRC
 National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission  
   New Delhi 
  
  
 Revision Petition 186/2007
(From the
order dated 9.11.2006 passed in First Appeal No. 813 of 2006 by the State
Commission,   Delhi) 
National Insurance Co. Ltd.
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
1

--- PAGE 2 ---

D.O.XVII, 12, Community
Centre,
2nd Floor, East of Kailash,
  New Delhi
 110 065
  
Also at
  
National Insurance Co. Ltd.,
Through Regional Office-I,
Jeevan
Bharati Tower-2,
Level-4, 124,  Connaught Circus,
  New Delhi  110
001.  Petitioner
  
 Versus
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
2

--- PAGE 3 ---

  
Shri D.P.
Jain 
2605, Sector 15,
  Faridabad (Haryana)   Respondent
  
   
 Revision Petition 187/2007
(From the
order dated 9.11.2006 passed in First Appeal No. 812 of 2006 by the State
Commission,   Delhi) 
National Insurance Co. Ltd.
D.O.XVII, 12, Community
Centre,
2nd Floor, East of Kailash,
  New Delhi
 110 065
  
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
3

--- PAGE 4 ---

Also at
  
National Insurance Co. Ltd.,
Through Regional Office-I,
Jeevan
Bharati Tower-2,
Level-4, 124,  Connaught Circus,
  New Delhi  110
001.  Petitioner
  
 Versus
  
.1. Shri Manjeet
Kumar,
 H. No. 1/5708, Gali No.16,
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
4

--- PAGE 5 ---

 Balbir Nagar,
 Shahdara, 
   New Delhi.
  
.2. M/s. A.K.Govil & Associates,
 2nd Floor, 144, Jorbagh,
   New Delhi  Respondents
  
   
 BEFORE: 
HONBLE
MR.JUSTICE M.B. SHAH,  
 PRESIDENT. 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
5

--- PAGE 6 ---

 DR.
P.D. SHENOY, MEMBER. 
For the Appellant (Insurance
Co.) : Mr.
Atul Nanda, 
In both the petitions Advocate.
  
For the Respondent in
RP186/2007 : N E M O
  
For the Respondent(s) in RP
187/2007 : Mr. Rajeev Aggarwal.
  
 Dated   the 15th  May, 2007  
 O R D
E R  
 M.B.Shah , J. President.  
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
6

--- PAGE 7 ---

 Revision Petition No.186/2007: 
 In this case the
Complainant/Respondent purchased a Nokia mobile handset for a sum of Rs.6,100/- on 04.10
daughter which was carrying free
insurance cover for one year. The
handset was stolen from
the bag of complainants daughter on 21.10.2004. In this regard a report was lodged by th
complainant with the Police on the same day i.e. 21.10.2004. Thereafter, the complainant
with the Insurance Company, which repudiated the claim on the ground that there
was absence of actual or threatened force as per clause of the terms and
condition mentioned in the policy. Hence, the Complainant filed a complaint
No.845/2005 before the District Forum-II,   Delhi. The District Forum allowed the
complaint by its order dated 20.7.2006 and directed the
insurance to pay the complainant a sum of Rs.6,100/- i.e. the cost of mobile handset, Rs
and Rs.1000/- as cost of litigation. Being
aggrieved against the order of the District Forum, the Insurance Company filed Appeal No
Petition. 
   
 Revision Petition No.187/2007: 
  The facts of this case are similar to that
of Revision Petition
No.186/2007. The Complainant
purchased a Nokia mobile handset on 22.8.2004 for a sum of Rs.17,150/- which carries a t
insurance cover free of charge for one year against theft, etc. Theft of the
Nokia mobile handset took place on 6.3.2005 by breaking open the door of the
car. For that an FIR was also lodged. But, when the claim was lodged with the
Insurance Company, the Insurance Company repudiated the claim on the ground
that there was absence of forced and violent entry or exit, as has been
incorporated in exclusion clause 1B(a) of the
insurance cover. Hence, the Complainant knocked the doors of the District
Consumer Forum by filing Case No. 759 of 2005. 
  
 That
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
7

--- PAGE 8 ---

complaint was allowed by the District Forum by order dated 27.7.2006 and the
Insurance Company was directed to reimburse the complainant a sum of Rs.17,150/-, i.e. t
compensation of Rs.1,000/- and Rs.1,000/- as costs of litigation.  
  
 Hence,
the Insurance Company preferred First Appeal No. 821 of 2006 before the Delhi State Comm
State Commission by discussing what is meant by theft, burglary, extortion,
robbery and house breaking. Hence, this Revision Petition. 
  
 Findings: 
I.   Mr.Nanda, learned counsel appearing for the Insurance
Company, vehemently contended that the impugned order passed by the State
Commission is unjustified and arbitrary as the State Commission has no
jurisdiction or power to ignore the law laid down by the Apex Court in the case
of United India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Harchand Rai Chandan Lal
 (2004)8 SCC 644. 
  
  We
entirely agree with Mr.Nanda that the State
Commission cannot by-pass the judgement rendered by the   Apex Court.  
  
  However,
the State Commission, while disposing of the matter, has drawn the attention to
the word theft as used and understood in common parlance and held that
it would not mean taking away of the property by violence means. If the
property is taken away by force, it would not be understood as theft. Further,
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
8

--- PAGE 9 ---

if the words used in the insurance policy are vague, benefit of that word or
phrase is required to be given to the insured.  
  
 Whatever
be the position, in our view, once there is a binding judgment of the 
  Apex Court, the State Commission ought to have followed the same.  
  
.II. (a)  Effect of Regulation No.3 of the
IRDA Regulations: 
  The
next important question which requires consideration in these Revision
Petitions is to the effect of Regulation 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority (Protection of Policy Holders Interests) Regulations, 2002,
framed by Insurance Regulatory & Development Authority (IRDA) in exercise
of powers under Section 114(A) of the Insurance Act, 1938 read with Sections 14
and 26 of the Insurance Regulatory & Development Authority Act, 1999. 
  
 The
Regulations came into effect from the year 2002. Therefore, the policies which
are issued after 2002 are being covered by the said Regulations and are required to be
followed by the Insurance Company.  
  
 It
is to be stated that the aforesaid Regulations are framed by the IRDA to protect
the interests of the policyholders.
Firstly, Regulation 3 requires to be followed by the insurance companies
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
9

--- PAGE 10 ---

so that the terms of the insurance policy do not operate harshly against the
insured and in favour of the insurer.  
  
Regulation
 3 thereof reads as under: 
  
3. Point of sale. [(1)
Notwithstanding anything mentioned in regulation 2(e) above, a prospectus of
any insurance product shall clearly state the scope of benefits, the extent of
insurance cover and in an explicit manner explain the warranties, exceptions
and conditions of the insurance cover and, in case of life insurance, whether
the product is participating (with profits) or non-participating (without
profits). The allowable rider or riders
on the product shall be clearly spelt out with regard to their scope of
benefits, and in no case, the premium relatable to health related or critical
illness riders in the case of term or group products shall exceed 100% of
premium under the basic product. All other riders put together shall be subject
to a ceiling of 30 per cent of the premium of the basic product. Any benefit
arising under each of the rider shall not exceed the sum assured under the
basic product: 
  
 Provided that
the benefit
amount under riders shall be subject to Section 2(11) of the Insurance Act,
1938. 
  
 Explanation. The rider or riders attached to a life policy shall bear
the nature and character of the main policy, viz., participating or
non-participating and accordingly the life insurer shall make provisions, etc.,
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
10

--- PAGE 11 ---

in its books.] 
  
 (2) An insurer or its agent or other
intermediary shall provide all material information in respect of a proposed
cover to the prospect to enable the prospect to decide on the best cover
that would be in his or her interest. 
  
 (3). Where the prospect depends upon the advice
of the insurer or his agent or an insurance intermediary, such a person must
advise the prospect dispassionately.  
  
 (4). Where, for any reason, the proposal and
other connected papers are not filled by the prospect, a certificate may be
incorporated at the end of proposal form from the prospect that the
contents of the form and documents have been fully explained to him and that he
has fully understood the significance of the proposed contract. 
  
 (5). In the process of sale, the insurer or its
agent or any intermediary shall act according to the code of conduct prescribed
by  
 (i). the Authority; 
(ii). The
Councils that have been established under Section 64C of the Act; and, 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
11

--- PAGE 12 ---

(iii). The recognized professional body or association of which the
agent or intermediary or insurance intermediary is a member. 
  
  The
aforesaid Regulation makes it clear that  
(i)               
the prospectus of insurance product are
required to clearly state the scope of benefits, the extent of insurance cover
and in explicit manner explain the warranties, exceptions and conditions
of the insurance cover. The
phraseology used is mandatory by providing that it shall be stated clearly. 
  
(ii)             
Sub-Regulation (2) provides that an
insurer or its agent or other intermediary shall provide all material
information in respect of the proposed cover to the insured. 
  
(iii)           
Sub-Regulation 4 also provides that
if the proposal and other connected papers are not filled by the prospect, a certificate
is required to be incorporated at the end of the Proposal Form from
the prospect that the contents of the form and documents have been fully
explained to him.  
  
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
12

--- PAGE 13 ---

  From
the above it is amply clear that the rule making Authority has taken much care
to protect the interest of the consumer. At this stage, whether the insurance
company can contend that even though it has not followed the binding
Regulations, the said Regulations/the Exclusion Clauses are yet binding to the
complainant? 
 In our view, the unexplained or
unnoticed exclusion clauses would not be binding to the insured. The reason
being, the Regulations are of mandatory in nature so as to protect the
consumers interests. 
  
(b)   Position before the
coming into force of IRDA Regulations : 
  
 Secondly,
even before the Regulations came into force,
the Apex Court in Modern Insulators Ltd. Vs. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
(2000) 2 SCC 734 has specifically held that Exclusion Clauses, which are not
explained to the insured, are not binding to the insured and are required to be
ignored. The Court in para 9 held thus: 
9.  In view of the
above settled position of law we are of the opinion that the view expressed by
the National Commission is not correct. As the above terms and conditions of
the standard policy wherein the exclusion clause was included, were neither a
part of the contract of insurance nor disclosed to the Appellant, the
Respondent cannot claim the benefit of the said exclusion clause. Therefore, the
finding of the National Commission is untenable in law. 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
13

--- PAGE 14 ---

  
 From the
Regulations as well as
the law laid down by the   Apex Court, it is clear that if Exclusion
Clauses are not explained, they are not binding on the insured.
Those exclusion clauses are required to be ignored while considering the
claim of the insured. 
  
III.    Disclosure
of material information in explicit manner: 
  
  However, Mr. Nanda, the learned counsel for the insurance company, contended that 
  
(a).   Even if there is a breach of Regulation 3 or any other
Regulation, Regulation 11(4) specifically empowers the IRDA to initiate action
against the insurer or insurance agent or against the intermediary, joint or
severally, under the Insurance Act or under the Insurance Regulatory &
Development Authority Act. He,
therefore, submitted that once this procedure is prescribed for taking action
under the regulations, Exclusion Clauses should be read, as they are. He contended that 
power to do an act and has laid down the method in which that power has to be
exercised, it necessarily prohibits doing of the act in any other manner than
that which has been prescribed. The
principle behind the Rule is that if those were not so, the Statutory
Provisions might as well would not have been
enacted. This principle has been
followed all-throughout. 
  
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
14

--- PAGE 15 ---

 In support of his
contention, Mr.Nanda vehemently submitted that it is
a matter of well settled law that when a Statute or Regulation provides for a
manner in which a particular thing must be done, then that thing must be done
in that manner only. The Rule of law laid down in Taylor Vs. Taylor 1876 1 Ch.D 426 has 
recognized and followed by courts in   India for several decades. The principle laid dow
an act and has laid down the method in which that power has to be exercised, it
necessarily prohibits the doing of the act in any other manner than that which
has been prescribed. The principle behind the Rule is that if these were not
so, the statutory provision might as well would have
not been enacted. The principle has been followed by Indian Courts in the cases
of Nazir Ahmed Vs. Emperor AIR 1936 PC 253, State of
UP Vs. Singhara Singh AIR 1964 SC 358, Ram Chandra Keshav Adke Vs. Govind 1975 (1) SCC 5
Vs. State of Rajasthan AIR 1961 SC 1527, Dhananjay
Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka 2001 (4) SCC 9, M.P. Wakf
Board Vs. Subhan Shah (2006) 10 SCC 696, Ram Chandra Murari Lal Vs. State of Maharashtra
  
  In
our view, there is no dispute with regard to the aforesaid settled law. In the light of 
submitted by Mr.Nanda and the provisions of Regulation
(3) and others, we have to find out whether the Regulations are being followed
by the Insurance Company or not. Because, if the statute has laid down the method in whi
Insurance Company has to exercise its right to issue the policy, then that procedure mus
it necessarily prohibits issuing the
policy in any other manner than what has been prescribed. The principle behind the afore
if these were not so, there
was no necessity of enacting the said Regulations. Hence, applying the said principles t
Regulation 3 we have to arrive at the conclusion that the Insurance Companies
are bound to follow the procedure
prescribed therein before issuing the insurance cover. The Insurance Company is
required to state the scope of benefits, the extent of insurance cover and in an
explicit manner explain the warranties, exceptions and conditions of the
insurance cover. The rider or riders are required to be clearly spelt out.
It is mandatory (the phrase used is shall provide) duty of insurer or its
agent or other intermediary to provide all material information in respect of a
proposed cover to the insured to enable him to decide the best cover that would
be in his or her interest.  
  
  Therefore, we accept the contention of
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
15

--- PAGE 16 ---

the learned Counsel for the Insurance Company, Mr.Nanda,
that when the Statute provides the manner in which a particular thing must be
done, then that thing must be done in that manner only. That means, the Insurance Compan
Regulations.  
  
 It is to be
stated that Mr.Nanda has contended that if the procedure is not followed it is for the
Regulatory Authority to take appropriate
action against the Insurance Company or the intermediary or the agent as
provided under Regulation 11(4), but
would not nullify the exclusion clauses.  
  
 In our view, the
aforesaid submission
cannot be accepted.  It cannot be contended with impunity that
even if the Insurance Company has not followed the said Regulations, at the
most the Regulatory Authority may take appropriate action, as provided under
sub-Regulation (4) of Regulation 11. Taking appropriate action under
sub-regulation (4) of Regulation 11 itself is an additional power vested with
the Regulatory Authority. But, not
taking of appropriate action would not mean that the Statute can be ignored
with impunity by
the Insurance Company. If the
Regulations are ignored and the procedure prescribed before issuing the policy
cover is not followed, then the unexplained exclusion clauses are required to
be ignored. 
  
 If
the procedure prescribed by the Regulations is not followed by the Insurance
Company before issuing insurance policy cover and the premium is recovered with
pleasure for earning profit, then the Insurance Company must suffer the consequences as 
to be held that exclusion clauses which
are not explained, are to be ignored for the purpose of insurance cover. We have to reit
taken by the   Apex Court in Modern Insulators
Ltd. (supra).
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
16

--- PAGE 17 ---

Secondly, if the contention of the Insurance Company is accepted, the whole
purpose of enacting Regulations for Protection of Policy Holders Interest
would be frustrated. The purpose and objective is to protect the policy holders interest
and that is required to be fulfilled by following the mandatory procedure
prescribed therein.
  
.(iv). Mr. Nanda, the learned counsel next contended that in all
other cases where violence is used and theft has taken place, the
Insurance Company has paid the insured the claimed amount. As against this contention we
insured amount in such cases was the
bounden obligation under the insurance policy. That would not empower the Insurance Comp
its intermediary, has not followed the Regulations by not explaining the
exclusion clauses to the insured i.e. the purchaser of the Nokia Mobile handset in the p
case, the Insurance Company can rely upon the exclusion clause for avoiding
its liability by not making
payment of the sum insured in case of
theft.
  
.(v). Mr.Nanda raised another
contention that the relationship between the Insurance Company and the HCL, which is the
principal and therefore, HCL would
be liable to reimburse the complainants.
  
 In
our view, this submission is devoid of any substance. The Insurance Company has undertak
event of peril. It is to be stated that a copy of the Certificate of Insurance given to 
consumer of Nokia GSM Mobile Handset, is
produced on record for our perusal. It
mentions, HCL-SAFEGUARD NOKIA GSM MOBILE HANDSET INSURANCE COVER. The certificate is iss
it is signed by the authorized signatory for the National Insurance Co. Ltd.
This would mean that the Insurance Company would be straightaway liable.  
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
17

--- PAGE 18 ---

.(vi). Finally, the learned counsel for the Insurance Company
vehemently submitted that the contention with regard to not following
Regulation No. 3 was
not raised before the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or the State
Commission and, therefore, this Commission should not deal with the same.
  
 In
our view, the said submission is required to be rejected because:
  
.(a).   Firstly, we have to state that at the admission
stage by order dated 13.11.2006 we have directed as under: 
  
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
In our
view, prima facie, it is apparent that there is a total violation of Regulation
3 of the Insurance Regulation and Development Authority (Protection of
Policyholders Interest) Regulations, 2002.
However, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that whether the
said Regulation 3 is followed by the insurance companies or its intermediary,
appropriate affidavit would be filed within a period of 4 weeks from today by a
responsible officer of the insurance company.
We hope that correct facts would be stated by the concerned officer
without suppressing any material. 
This
observation is made because the responsible officer of the agent of the NOKIA
states that there was no question of explaining any terms of the policy to the
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
18

--- PAGE 19 ---

complainant/purchaser of the NOKIA handset.
Learned counsel, Mr.Amit
K. Das, appearing for NOKIA states that the insurance policy is purchased by
the HCL and is given to the NOKIA for promoting their sale and the dealer of
the NOKIA is handing over this policy to the consumer. 
 Stand over to  31st January 2007 for
further hearing.  
Meantime,
it would be open to the dealer of NOKIA to file the necessary affidavit. Dasti in additi
  
 None has filed the affidavit
stating that procedure prescribed under Regulation No.3 was followed and exclusion
clauses were explained. 
  
.(b). Further, we make it clear that Consumer Fora are not required to follow the advers
remand the matter to trial Court in such cases. If that system is required to be followe
then there is no necessity
for separate enactment for rendering inexpensive and
speedier justice to the consumers. We
reiterate that Consumer Fora are required to follow inquisitorial (to
hold inquiry by itself) procedure for finding out the truth for
rendering inexpensive or less expensive speedy justice. The consumer would be
frustrated if the matter involving small amount is remanded and he is required
to approach the District Consumer Forum again and again. That itself would
result in injustice to the consumers and hence that lengthy procedure is
required to be avoided. 
  
.(c). Further, at the time of hearing of the matter the
learned Counsel for the dealer has stated that it is not necessary to explain
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
19

--- PAGE 20 ---

exclusion clauses because only one standard cover is there. 
  
  After the arguments were over, learned
Counsel Mr. Nanda tendered an affidavit on behalf of the Insurance Company
contending that the statement made by the learned Counsel for the Dealer, while
addressing the Commission, that the dealers are not obliged to explain to the
handset purchaser anything under the Regulation No.3, was in the context and scope of Re
3(2). 
  
 In
our view, giving of such gloss to the admission is neither justifiable nor
acceptable. In any set of circumstances, as stated
above, neither the Insurance Company nor its agent nor the intermediary (HCL)
nor the dealer has filed affidavit contending that they have followed the
procedure prescribed under Regulation No.3 and explained the exclusion clauses
to the purchasers of Nokia handset. It is to be emphasized that such type of
advertisement of giving free insurance cover, gives an added advantage of
marketing of Nokia handset and increasing the sale of goods/handsets.
  
 Again
it is to be stated that the insurance cover is handed over to the consumer by
the dealer of Nokia. Therefore, the
statement made on behalf of the dealer is of importance and not that of
intermediary, or insurance Company because insurance cover is not handed over
by the intermediary, or Insurance Company or its agent.
  
.(d).  It is also the duty of the Insurance Company or its agent or its
intermediary to abide by the
Regulations and whether they have
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
20

--- PAGE 21 ---

followed that Regulation or not is
required to be stated by them. It is
the duty of the Insurance Company, prima facie, to prove and establish that the Insuranc
Company has followed the said Regulation/procedure.
  
  It is to be stated that terms which are
mentioned at the over leaf of the insurance certificate are in very small
print, and require magnifying glass for reading the same. So, we can draw an
inference that it is not read by anyone.
  
.(e). It is a matter of common knowledge that consumers are
attracted to purchase a particular goods or brand of mobile handset depending upon the a
an additional benefit of free
insurance cover. 
  
 No
doubt, we have to state, that wherever the Nokia Company was party to the
litigation, the learned counsel representing the Company, without prejudice to the right
to pay the amount as ordered by the
District Forum.  One such case is Revision Petition No.3110/2006 (National
Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Gynander Singh, decided on
03.05.2007). In that case, this
Commission observed as under:
  
We hope that companies in   India would try
to follow such a gesture towards the consumers and not to raise unnecessary
dispute and litigate, so that the consumers are not driven for a small amount
to the National Commission or to the Supreme Court. This type of practice is required
to be adopted in the interest of consumers all over the country. Unfortunately, we have 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
21

--- PAGE 22 ---

legal practice to such an extent that even established facts are denied
in the written version. 
  
 Unfortunately,
such practice is not followed by the Insurance Company after receiving the
premium and Insurance Companies are dragging the consumers to unending
litigation.
  
 In
conclusion, we hold that:
  
.(i). Exclusion Clauses are required
to be ignored if the Insurance Company
or its Agent or Intermediary does not adhere to the mandatory requirement of
explaining the Exclusion Clauses
before issuance of insurance
cover.
  
.(ii). The procedure prescribed under Regulation 3, is required
to be followed. In case the said
procedure is not followed, apart from aforesaid consequences, the Regulatory Authority c
Under Regulation 11(4) against the Insurance Company.
  
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
22

--- PAGE 23 ---

.(iii). The Regulations are based on settled law declared from
time to time by the Courts. (Re: Modern Insulators
Ltd. vs. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. (2000) 2 SCC 734].
  
(iiii) Intermediary, the HCL, in the
present case, has issued the insurance
cover as an agent of the Insurance Company.
Therefore, the Insurance Company is bound to reimburse the Complainant in case
of theft of the mobile handset. Free insurance cover is a method adopted
as a part of aggressive marketing.
  
 In the Result, the Revision Petitions are dismissed. There shall be no order as to cost
 Sd/- 
  
J.
( M.B. SHAH )
PRESIDENT
  
Sd/- 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
23

--- PAGE 24 ---

  
....
(P.D. SHENOY) MEMBER p
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Shri D.P. Jain on 15 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167864680/
24