--- PAGE 1 ---

Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors. vs The Government Tool
Room And Training ... on 17 May, 2007
 NCDRC
NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL
COMMISSION 
  NEW DELHI 
  
  
 FIRST APPEAL NO. 383 OF
2005 
 (From the order dated 17.06.2005 in Complaint No.
37/01 of the State Commission, Karnataka) 
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors. vs The Government Tool Room And Training ... on 17 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/513592/
1

--- PAGE 2 ---

  
Oriental Insurance
Co. Ltd. & Ors. 
Appellants 
  
Versus 
  
The Government Tool Room and
Training Centre Respondent 
  
  
 BEFORE : 
 HONBLE
MR.JUSTICE M.B. SHAH, PRESIDENT 
 MRS.
RAJYALAKSHMI RAO, MEMBER 
  
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors. vs The Government Tool Room And Training ... on 17 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/513592/
2

--- PAGE 3 ---

  
For the Appellant : Mr.
Joy Basu & Mr. Maibam
N. Singh, Advocates 
  
For the Respondent : Mr.
Y.N. Ramanna, Advocate 
  
  
 17.05.2007 
 ORDER 
 
M.B. SHAH, PRESIDENT   Heard the Learned Counsel for the parties.
This case illustrates how the Insurance Company can even harass the Government Department
which is a part and parcel of Union of India, i.e. Industries and Commerce, the Government Tool
Room and Training Centre.
The sole dispute in this first appeal is with regard to the discharge voucher signed by the Vice
Chairman of the respondent with regard to the amount received from the Insurance Company as full
and final settlement.
In the present case, it is to be stated that such contention is raised despite the law being settled. As
early as in 1986 the Apex Court discussed the concept of coercive bargaining in Central Water
Transport Corporation Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Tarun Kanti Sengupta & Anr. (1986)3 SCC 156 and held that
where a man has no choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his consent to a contract or
to sign on the dotted line in a prescribed or other form or to accept a set of rules as part of contract,
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors. vs The Government Tool Room And Training ... on 17 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/513592/
3

--- PAGE 4 ---

however unfair, unreasonable and unconscionable a clause in that contract may be the courts will
enforce and will, when called upon to do so, strike down as unfair and unreasonable contract or an
unfair or unreasonable clause in a contract entered into between the parties who are not equal in
bargaining power. In arriving at the aforesaid conclusion the Court referred to Chitti on Contracts
(25th Edn. Vol.1, pr.4) wherein it has also been observed that the Courts have developed a number
of devices for refusing to implement exemption clauses imposed by the economically stronger party
on the weaker. Thereafter, in the United India Insurance Company Ltd. Vs. Ajmer Singh Cotton &
General Mills & Ors. (1999) 6 SCC 400, wherein the Court observed that mere execution of
discharge voucher and acceptance of insurance claim would not estop insured from making further
claim from the insurer under the circumstances which can be termed as exercise of undue influence
or coercion or the like.
Before the State Commission, it was vehemently contended by the Insurance Company that the
complaint was not maintainable for recovering the remaining amount because the Vice Chairman of
the Government Tool Room and Training Centre has signed the voucher given by the Insurance
Company as full and final settlement and therefore, complaint under the Consumer Protection Act is
not maintainable.
It is to be stated that if the Government department is required to accept the amount for one or
other reason and sign the document as full and final settlement, think of the fate of a consumer
whose entire factory is gutted by fire; when the banks are insisting for repayment of the loan amount
and the creditors are harassing the owner of the factory by various means. In that set of
circumstances, if a person requires the money and signs the voucher as receipt of full and final of
claim, it amounts coercive practice by the Insurance Company. Various such illustrations can be
given but this is only to highlight that wrong practice followed by the Insurance Companies in not
paying the single pie without having a discharge voucher stating that the amount is received by the
claimant as full and final settlement of his claim. In our view, it is a coercive practice. And, it is
suggested that the Insurance Companies may abandon this practice and do not try to snatch away
the right of the insured to approach the legal forum for getting just and reasonable reimbursement.
(1) In support of its claim the Managing Director of the Government Tool Room and Training
Centre, Bangalore, has filed an affidavit to the effect that Insurance Company informed that it was a
standard format prescribed by them and unless and until voucher was signed, they would not
release the fund. They also informed that it would be always open for the complainant to agitate the
matter if they were not satisfied with the amount but so far as Insurance Company is concerned
unless the voucher was signed the issue of release of funds could not be made.
It appears that this wrong practice is required to be given up by the Insurance Company or in any set
of circumstances we would suggest to IRDA to keep control upon such unfair trade practice.
(2) It has been further stated that the Legal Department of the complainant, i.e. Govt. Tool Room
and Training Centre advised the complainant that this acceptance of the money by signing the
voucher would not prejudice the claim of the complainant. We have to state that such advice is an
erroneous one. But wrong and erroneous advice by a counsel would be a sufficient ground for
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors. vs The Government Tool Room And Training ... on 17 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/513592/
4

--- PAGE 5 ---

finding out the truth.
(3) Even the government department states on affidavit that the department was in dire/urgent
need of funds to pay backlog salaries of their employees. This would be sufficient for holding that
the voucher was not signed voluntarily but was signed under compulsion.
(4) Further, it is to be stated that after receipt of the amount on 7.7.2000, on 31.7.2000 complainant
wrote letter to the Insurance Company that deduction of Rs. 10,32,500/- was unjustified. Not only
that but even the receipt was a pre-paid stamped receipt for an amount of Rs.16,37,000/- and is
taken prior to payment.
Considering the aforesaid aspects, in our view impugned order passed by the State Commission does
not call for any interference. The First Appeal is dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
The Registry is directed to send copy of this order to Shri C.S. Rao, Chairman of Insurance
Regulatory Development Authority, Hyderabad for taking appropriate action so that option/choice
of the insured to approach the legal forum for just settlement of his claim is not curtailed or
frustrated.
 
J. (M.B. SHAH) PRESIDENT     (RAJYALAKSHMI RAO) MEMBER P/19/Court-1    
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors. vs The Government Tool Room And Training ... on 17 May, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/513592/
5