--- PAGE 1 ---

Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11
April, 2014
NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION 
NEW DELHI 
  
 REVISION PETITION NO.578 OF 2013 
(From the order dated
30.11.2012 in F.A. No.1047/2012 of the  
Haryana State
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Panchkula) 
  
Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49540997/
1

--- PAGE 2 ---

Smt. Shakuntala   ... PETITIONER 
W/o
Late Sh. Rajinder 
R/o
House No.323, Siraspur 
Delhi-110042 
  
 Versus  
Life Insurance
Corporation of India   RESPONDENT 
Branch No.317, Jeevan Bharti Building 
Sector-15, Sonepat 
Harayana 
   
 BEFORE: 
 HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE AJIT
BHARIHOKE, PRESIDING MEMBER 
Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49540997/
2

--- PAGE 3 ---

HONBLE MR.SURESH CHANDRA, MEMBER 
  
For the Petitioner : Mr. P.S. Goindi, Advocate 
For the Respondent : Mr. U.C. Mittal,
Advocate 
   
 Pronounced on : 11th
April, 2014 
   ORDER 
JUSTICE AJIT BHARIHOKE, PRESIDING MEMBER This revision is directed against the order of
the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission Haryana ( in short, the State Commission)
dated 30.11.2012 in FA No. 1047/2012 whereby the State Commission Haryana allowed the appeal
against the order of the District Forum Sonepat and dismissed the complaint.
2. Briefly stated facts relevant for the disposal of this revision petition are that husband of the
petitioner obtained life insurance policy of Rs.1,00,000/- from the opposite party on 28.04.2004.
Rajinder Singh, husband of the petitioner died on 07.11.2004. The insurance claim was filed in
February 2010 on the plea that it could not be filed earlier because the petitioner had no knowledge
of the insurance policy. The opposite party repudiated the claim. Claiming this to be deficiency in
service, the petitioner filed the consumer complaint.
3. The respondent opposite party in his written statement justified the repudiation of claim on three
counts, firstly, that the complaint was barred by limitation as it was filed seven years after the date
of death of the insured, secondly the insured had failed to pay the second instalment of the
insurance premium which became due prior to the death of insured on 28.10.2004 and thirdly on
the ground that the insurance policy was obtained by the insured by concealment of material fact
regarding his having been operated upon for removal of gall bladder in December 2003.
Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49540997/
3

--- PAGE 4 ---

4. Learned District Forum on consideration of material on record and the evidence adduced by the
parties allowed the complaint and granted relief to the petitioner as under:
The complainant is only entitled to the claim amount of rupees one lac and the
request for the complainant for the grant of interest and compensation stands
rejected since the deceased LA had expired on 07.11.2004 and as per the complainant
herself, the fact of insurance policy in the name of deceased Rajinder Singh had come
into her knowledge in Feb 2010.
Accordingly, it is directed to the respondent to make the payment of Rs. One Lac only
to the complainant.
With these observations, findings and directions, the present complaint stands
accepted partly.
5. Being aggrieved of the order of the District Forum, the respondent opposite party preferred an
appeal. The State Commission on hearing the parties and perusal of record, allowed the appeal and
dismissed the complaint. Relevant observations of the State Commission are reproduced thus:
It is not disputed that husband of the complainant had obtained insurance policy for
Rs.one lac on 28.04.2004. It is also not disputed that life assured had died on
07.11.2004 and intimation was given to the OP on 12.03.2010. It is also not disputed
that husband of the complainant died on 07.11.2004 whereas the complaint was filed
by the complainant before the District Forum on 14.10.2011 i.e. after about six years
and thus the complaint was not maintainable as time prescribed under Section 24A
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 according to which complaint was to be filed
was within two years from the date of cause of action.
Reference may be made to case law cited as V.N.Shrikhande (Dr.) Versus Anita Sena Fernandes 2011
CTJ 1 (supreme court) CP) wherein the Honble Supreme Court has held that:
24-A(1) contains a negative legislative mandate against admission of a complaint
which has been filed after 2 years from the date of accrual of the cause of action. In
other words, the Consumer Forums do not have the jurisdiction to entertain a
complaint if the same is not filed within 2 years from the date on which the cause of
action has arisen. This power is required to be exercised after giving opportunity of
hearing to the complainant, who can seek condonation of delay under Section
24-A(2) by showing that there was sufficient cause for not filing the complaint within
the period prescribed under Section 24-A(1). If the complaint is per se barred by time
and the complainant does not seek condonation of delay under Section 24-A(2), the
Consumer Forums will have no option but to dismiss the same.
 
Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49540997/
4

--- PAGE 5 ---

The present case is fully covered by V.N.Shrikhande (Dr.) Versus Anita Sena
Fernandes (supra) and as such the complaint filed by the complainant deserved to be
dismissed.
It is admitted case of parties that life assured obtained insurance policy from the OP.
The allegation of OP-appellant was that life assured was suffering from pre-existing
disease and did not disclose this fact while taking out the policy. The claim was
repudiated on the ground that the life assured was suffering from pre-existing disease
which he had not disclosed at the time of proposal and thus the life assured has
concealed material particular about his health, thus the claim was rightly repudiated.
Thus, it has not been disputed that the life assured took put policy and death
occurred on 11.10.1996. The life assured did not disclose the above said facts while
taking out the policy. The perusal of proposal form shows life assured had not
disclosed about his operation of gall bladder in the proposal form.
While dealing with the contention raised on behalf of the appellant, we have to follow
the observation made by the Honble National Commission in case cited as Kokilaben
Narendrabhai Patel Vs. Life Insurance Corporation of India 2010 CTJ 920 (CP)
(NCDRC), which are reproduced under:-
Insurance-Deficiency in service Consumer Protection Act, 1986 Section 2(I)
(g)-Section 2(I)
(o)-Insured died due to heart attack-His wife nominated to receive the insured
amount in the event of his premature death-Repudiation of her claim-Allegedly
correct answers not given by the deceased regarding his health in the proposal
form-Complaint by his wife allowed by the District Forum-State Commission
accepted the appeal and set aside the order passed by the Forum-Hence, the present
revision petition-Admittedly the insured suffered from Enteric fever eleven months
prior to the taking of the policy-Further, for getting it treated, he even took leave for
seventeen days-These two facts not disclosed by him in the proposal
form-Non-disclosure thereof was clearly a material fact having a bearing on the risk
involved-Repudiation of the claim fully justified-View taken by the State Commission
upheld-Revision Dismissed.
Another observation made by Honble Supreme Court in case titled Satwant Kaur Sandhu Vs. New
India Assurance Company Limited (2009) 8 SCC 316, holding as under:-
When information on a specific aspect is asked for in the proposal form, the assured
is under a solemn obligation to make a true and full disclosure of the information on
the subject which is within his knowledge. Obligation to disclose extends only to facts
which are known to the applicant and not to what he ought to have known. Whether
the information sought for is material for the purpose of the policy is a matter not to
Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49540997/
5

--- PAGE 6 ---

be determined by the proposer.
It has further been held that a mediclaim policy is a non-life insurance policy meant
to assure the policy holder in respect of certain expenses pertaining to injury,
accidents or hospitalizations. Nonetheless, it is a contract of insurance falling in the
category of contract uberrimae fidei, meaning a contract of utmost good faith on the
part of the assured. Thus, when an information on a specific aspect is asked for in the
proposal form, an assured is under a solemn obligation to make a true and full
disclosure of the information on the subject which is within his knowledge. It is not
for the proposer to determine whether the information.
In para 29, the Honble Supreme Court has observed as under:-
Judged from any angle, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the
statement made by the insured in the proposal form as to the state of his health was
palpably untrue to his knowledge. There was clear suppression of material facts in
regard to the health of the insured and, therefore, the respondent insurer was fully
justified in repudiating the insurance contract. We do not find any substance in the
contention of learned counsel for the appellant that reliance could not be placed on
the certificate obtained by the respondent from the hospital, where the insured was
treated.
 
The case law cited (supra) above is fully applicable in this case.
The District Forum passed the impugned order by ignoring all these aspects and as
such the impugned order being an illegal one cannot be sustained.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioner Mr.P.S.Goindi, Advocate has contended that the impugned
order of the State Commission is based upon incorrect appreciation of facts and law. It is argued
that the State Commission has committed a grave error in coming to the conclusion that the insured
obtained the insurance policy by concealing the material fact regarding his earlier surgery from the
respondent.
Expanding on the argument, learned counsel submitted that the State Commission failed to
appreciate that the signatures of the insured were obtained by the agent of the insurance company
on the blank proposal form which was filled in later. Therefore, the insured cannot be held guilty of
suppression of concealment of material facts and as such the judgments referred to in the order of
the State Commission are not applicable to the facts of the case.
It is further contended that State Commission has committed a grave error in holding that the
complaint is barred by limitation ignoring the fact that the petitioner was not even aware of the
insurance policy of her husband and as soon as she came to know about the insurance policy in
Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49540997/
6

--- PAGE 7 ---

February 2010, she filed a consumer complaint.
7. Learned Shri U.C.Mittal, Advocate for the respondent on the contrary has argued in support of the
impugned order and prays for dismissal of revision petition. 8. On perusal of record, we do not find
merit in the contention of the petitioner. On perusal of the copy of the proposal form submitted by
the insured Rajinder Singh for obtaining insurance, we find that there is a questionnaire about the
previous history of the insured in coloumn no.11. The insured was required to furnish information as
to whether the insured had ever been admitted to the hospital / nursing home for general check-up,
observation, treatment or operation. The insured in response to the aforesaid question has answered
in the negative.
The proposal form is dated 28.04.2004.
As per the Medical Attendants Certificate issued by Dr. O.P.Pathania, Professor of Surgery,
Department of Surgery LHMC & Hospital who last attended the insured, the insured had been
suffering from Cholecystectomy for the last 1 year prior to the date of his death and he has
undergone surgery for removal of gall bladder at Sunder Lal Jain Hospital in December 2003.
Relevant portion of the aforesaid certificate is reproduced thus:
a. What was the exact cause of death?
(Besides defing the disease or other cause of death in such terms as you consider
appropriate kindly add the distinctive technical name).
(a)  Obstruction, Jaundice CSA 10 encephalopathy with DIC C Chandigarh   b. Was it
ascertained by examination after death or inferred from symptoms and appearance
during life
(b)  Lap c. How long had he been suffering from this disease before his death
(c)  1 years. H/o Cholecystectomy d. What were the symptoms of the illness
(d)  Open Surgical removal of Gall bladder at Sunder Lal Jain Hospital (2003 Dec.) e.
When were they first observed by the deceased.
(e)    f. What was the date on which you were first consulted during the illness
(f)    22.07.2004 g. Did you attend him during the whole of its course. If not, state
during what period?
(g)  Yes.
 
Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49540997/
7

--- PAGE 8 ---

9. From the above, it is clear that the insured had undergone surgery for removal of
his gall bladder in December 2003 prior to the submission of proposal form in April
2004 and the aforesaid fact was concealed from the respondent insurance company.
The explanation of learned counsel for the petitioner that the insured signed the
blank proposal form which was later on filled in by the insurance agent is not
acceptable particularly when there is no cogent evidence to substantiate it.
Thus, it is clear case of concealment of material information regarding surgery by the insured. That
being the case, in view the judgment of the Supreme Court in the matter of Satwant Kaur Sandhu
(supra) the State Commission was right in dismissing the complaint filed by the petitioner.
Otherwise also, it is admitted case of the parties that the husband of the complainant died on
07.11.2004 but the consumer complaint was filed after seven years. The petitioner has tried to
explain this delay by making a bald allegation that she had no knowledge about the insurance policy
of her late husband and this fact came to her knowledge in February 2010. We are not inclined to
accept this explanation particularly when the exact date on which the petitioner came to know about
insurance policy is not mentioned.
Thus, the order of the State Commission even on the point of limitation cannot be faulted.
10. In view of the observation above, we find that the impugned order of the State Commission is
based upon the settled law. Therefore, we find no reason to interfere with the order in exercise of
revisional jurisdiction. Revision petition, is therefore, dismissed.
.
(AJIT BHARIHOKE, J) (PRESIDING MEMBER)       .
(SURESH CHANDRA) MEMBER Am
Smt. Shakuntala vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 11 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49540997/
8