--- PAGE 1 ---

Go Digit General Insurance Limited vs Smti Mithu Jamatia on 19
June, 2026
               STATE CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION
                                            TRIPURA
                             FIRST APPEAL NO. SC/16/FA/13/2025
    (Against the Order dated 1st July 2025 in Complaint No. DC/272/CC/47/2024 of the Dis
                    Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission West tripura)
GO DIGIT GENERAL INSURANCE LIMITED
PRESENT ADDRESS - ADDRESS ATLANTIS, 95, 4TH B CROSS ROAD, KORAMANGALA
INDUSTRIAL LAYOUT, 5TH BLOCK, BENGALURU, KARNATAKA, 560095.BENGALURU
URBAN,KARNATAKA.
                                                              .......Appellant(s)
                                             Versus
SMTI MITHU JAMATIA
PRESENT ADDRESS - PRESENTLY RESIDING AT CO BIBEK TRIPURA,
KRISHNANAGAWEST TRIPURA,TRIPURA.
                                                                             .......Resp
BEFORE:
   HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE BISWAJIT PALIT , PRESIDENT
   MRS. DALIA SAHA , MEMBER
   MR. JHANTU DEBNATH , MEMBER
FOR THE APPELLANT:
       SHUBHAJIT CHAKRABORTY (Advocate)
FOR THE RESPONDENT:
       SAMPAD CHOUDHURY (Advocate)
DATED: 19/06/2026
                                             ORDER
CAV reserved on              : 05.05.2026.
Judgment & Order
delivered on                : 19.06.2026
Whether fit for reporting   : YES/NO
                                      JUDGMENT & ORDER
Go Digit General Insurance Limited vs Smti Mithu Jamatia on 19 June, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196987760/
1

--- PAGE 2 ---

Heard Learned Counsel, Mr. S. Chakraborty appearing on behalf of the appellant-Insurance
Company and also heard Learned Counsel, Mr. S. Choudhury appearing on behalf of the
respondent- claimant.
02. The appellant by this appeal has challenged the judgment dated 01.07.2025 passed by the West
Tripura District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission on 01.07.2025 in connection with case
No.CC 47 of 2024. By the said judgment and order the District Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission has awarded a sum of Rs.15,00,000/- with 7.5% interest from the date of filing the
complaint-petition before the Commission i.e. w.e.f. 06.05.2024 and also to pay of sum of
Rs.3,000,000/- as compensation to her mental agony and harassment with further sum of
Rs.50,000/- towards cost of litigation with an additional interest at the rate of 9% per annum.
03. At the time of hearing, Learned Counsel, Mr. S. Chakraborty appearing on behalf of the
appellant-Insurance Company drawn the attention of the Commission that the judgment of the
District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission suffers from various infirmities and the
respondent- claimant is not entitled to get any compensation but the District Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission ignoring the guidelines of IRDA awarded the compensation in favour of the
respondent for which the interference of this Commission is required. Learned Counsel for the
appellant further submitted that the policy was outside the purview of covering the personal
accident coverage as there was no coverage on the date of occurrence of the accident i.e. on
07.02.2024 and as such no claim is payable for non-coverage of the personal accident risk of owner
driver and as such the claim was not maintainable but the Learned District Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission ignoring the coverage allowed the claim of the respondent-claimant for
which the interference of this Commission is required.
04. On the other hand, on behalf of the respondent-complainant a written note was submitted. It
was submitted by the respondent-claimant that the deceased husband of the complainant, Upabashi
Jamatia was the registered owner-cum-driver of scooty bearing registration No.TR 03 L 4669
(Honda Dio) which was duly insured with the appellant-Insurance Company under policy
No.D024771785/28102020 valid from 28.10.2020 to 27.10.2025 and he had a valid driving license
vide DL No.TR03 20180054185. As such he is squarely false within the definition of owner-driver
under GR-36 of the India Motor Tariff and he is entitled to Compulsory Personal Accident (CPA)
cover, which is mandatory under GR.3 of the said Tariff.
05. According to the Learned Counsel for the respondent on 07.02.2024 at about 08:20 hours, while
the deceased was riding his scooty towards his residence that time another motorcycle came from
the opposite direction in rash and negligent manner dashed against the vehicle near Bagma
Chowmuhani, as a result of which deceased sustained grievous injuries on his head, chest and
multiple parts of the body and ultimately he succumbed to his injury. Accordingly, a written ejahar
was lodged at Bagma Police Out Post, Udaipur and a case was registered at R.K. Pur P.S. which
established the death of the deceased. The complainant sought to avail CPA benefits but the
appellant has no branch office in Tripura and finally the complaint was made.
Go Digit General Insurance Limited vs Smti Mithu Jamatia on 19 June, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196987760/
2

--- PAGE 3 ---

It was further submitted that as per GR.2 of the Indian Motor Tariff a Proposal Form be submitted
by the insured before commencement of the cover and at renewal in case of material alternation,
except in case of mere change of IDV, the insurer is duty bound to maintain the signed Proposal
Form as proof of options exercised by the insured. But in the given case, the Insurance Company has
failed to produce any signed Proposal Form of the deceased insured. Thus, suppressed the material
evidence. It was also submitted that for change of IDV at each renewal, fresh proposal is not
necessary and such changes may be advised by the insured to the insurer by a letter signed by the
insured/insured's authorized signatory (for companies/body corporate) and sent to the insurer by
recorded delivery. In case of change of insurer, a fresh proposal is required to be submitted to the
new insurer. As per GR.3 of the Indian Motor Tariff, Personal Accident Cover for Owner-Driver is
mandatory in all motor insurance policies, whether issued as Liability Only or Package Policy.
Further he referred GR.3 as follows:
"GR.3 Policy Forms: Policies insuring Motor Vehicles are to be issued only as per the
Standard Form(s) given in Section 6 of the Indian Motor Tariff. A. Types of Policies:
(i) Liability Only Policy: This covers Third Party Liability for bodily injury and/or
death and Property Damage. Personal Accident Cover for Owner-Driver is also
included.
(ii)Package Policy: This covers loss or damage to the vehicle insured in addition to (i)
above."
Learned Counsel further submitted that in the present case admittedly the deceased insured was
covered under a Liability Only Policy and hence, the Compulsory Personal Accident Cover stood
statutorily embedded in the contract of insurance and as such according Learned Counsel, the
rejection of the claim is contrary to GR.3 of the Indian Motor Tariff and as such repudiation
amounts to deficiency in service and unfair trade practice within the meaning of Section 2(11) and
2(47) of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
Further, Learned Counsel also referred GR.36 of the Indian Motor Tariff and supported that
Compulsory Personal Accident Cover Coverage embedded in all motor insurance policies whether
Liability Only or Package Policies, and is applicable to the registered owner-driver holding a valid
driving license. But the only exception permitted under GR.36 is where the insured has already
taken a separate PA Policy for the same owner-driver, and has expressly requested deletion of CPA
cover through a signed proposal form or endorsement. So, respondent-complainant is entitled to the
CPA benefit as a matter of statutory right, and adverse inference under Section 114(g) of the
Evidence Act, 1872 must be drawn against the appellant-Insurance Company. It was further
submitted that IRDA vide notification No.IRDAI/NL/CIR/MOTP/158/09/2018 dated 20.09.2018
submitted that the coverage under the Compulsory Personal Accident (CPA) Cover to
Rs.15,00,000/-. He also relied upon one judgment of the Karnataka State Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission in connection with case No.Appeal/2361/2023 dated 18.12.2023 wherein
Hon'ble State Commission observed as under:
Go Digit General Insurance Limited vs Smti Mithu Jamatia on 19 June, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196987760/
3

--- PAGE 4 ---

"It is the duty of the agent or insurer to inform the insured about the necessity of
availing personal accident coverage as the IRDA mandates under GR.36A.... Cover is
provided to the owner-driver whilst driving the vehicle including mounting
into/dismounting from or travelling in the insured vehicle as a co- driver. In such
being the case, as the agent or insurer was very much aware that the insured has valid
DL, as to how, issued only Two-Wheeler package Policy precluding Personal Accident
Cover. If the insured has not opted for Compulsory PA cover, the agent or insurer
could have precluded from issuing Two-Wheeler Package Policy in view of GR.36A.
Such incomplete proposal form, not offering compulsory PA cover, not collecting
premium to that effect and thereafter justifying repudiation of the Personal Accident
claim... amounts to deficiency in service and unfair trade practice."
Referring the same, he submitted that this case is squarely covered by the said aforesaid judgment
and urged for dismissal of the appeal.
06. We have heard Learned Counsel of both the parties at length and perused the judgment
delivered by the Learned District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. The subject matter of
the dispute has already been discussed above. The District Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission relied upon the Indian Motor Tariff Act 2002 and awarded compensation in favorer of
the respondent-claimant and came to the observation that there was deficiency of service on the part
of the appellant. We have also perused GR.2 of Indian Motor Tariff, GR.3 which discusses about
types of policies and category liability of the policies also covered for owner and driver and since the
deceased-insured was cover by Liability Only Policy as such the CPA cover stood and statutorily
embedded in the contract of insurance and GR.36 of the Indian Motor Tariff also supports the
matter. Learned Counsel for the appellant-Insurance Company also relied upon the notification
dated 20.09.2018 issued by the IRDA wherein in Clause-4(i) (ii) it has been provided as under:
4. In accordance with the above directions of the Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at
Madras, the Authority, in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 14(2) (i) of the
IRDA Act 1999 and in consultation with the stakeholders, hereby issues the following
modifications to General Regulation (GR)-36 of India Motor Tariff, 2002 on
Compulsory Personal Accident Cover for Owner-Driver.
(i) All General Insurers carrying on motor insurance business shall provide CPA
Cover for Owner-Driver under Liability Only, under Section III of Package Policies to
all classes of vehicles and Bundled Covers wherever applicable.
(ii) A minimum Capital Sum Insured (CSI) of Rs.15,00,000/- shall be provided under
CPA Cover for Owner-Driver under Liability Only, under Section III of Package
Policies to all classes of vehicles and Bundled Covers wherever applicable at the
premium rate of Rs.750/- per annum for annual policy. This rate will be valid until
further notice.
Go Digit General Insurance Limited vs Smti Mithu Jamatia on 19 June, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196987760/
4

--- PAGE 5 ---

Referring the aforesaid Clause-2(ii) Learned Counsel submitted that the insured in the policy did
not apply for PA cover and as such the claimant is not entitled to get the benefit and the judgment of
the Learned District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission suffers from infirmities .
07. To counter his submission, Learned Counsel for the respondent-claimant further submitted that
Clause-(ii) of the aforesaid regulation would be followed by Clause-(i) which ensures that these are
the mandatory guidelines/regulations which shows that all the insurance companies carrying on
business shall provide CPA cover for owner-driver under Liability Only under Section 3 of the
Package Policies to all classes of vehicles and bundled covers wherever applicable. So, the contention
of the Learned Counsel for the appellant-Insurance Company that no separate premium was paid
for PA coverage cannot be accepted and furthermore, by the aforesaid notification dated 20.09.2018
the guideline of the Indian Motor Tariff cannot be overrided and as such in the considered of this
Commission the case of the claimant covers under Liability Only Policy.
The citation as referred by Learned Counsel for the respondent-claimant also supports her case and
as such we do not find any error in the judgment delivered by the Learned District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission for interference.
08. In the result, the appeal filed by the appellant-Insurance Company stands dismissed being
devoid of merit. The appellant-Insurance Company is to ensure compliance of this judgment at an
earliest.
Send down the record to the Learned District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission along with
a copy of this judgment/order.
With these observations, this present appeal stands disposed of.
Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.
..................J BISWAJIT PALIT PRESIDENT ..................
DALIA SAHA MEMBER ..................
JHANTU DEBNATH MEMBER
Go Digit General Insurance Limited vs Smti Mithu Jamatia on 19 June, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196987760/
5