--- PAGE 1 ---

Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on
3 April, 2014
Equivalent citations: AIR 2015 (NOC) 94 (KAR.), 2014 (2) AKR 785
Author: Anand Byrareddy
Bench: Anand Byrareddy
                               1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BANGALORE
                                                     ®
        DATED THIS THE 03RD DAY OF APRIL 2014
                           BEFORE:
    THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANAND BYRAREDDY
         WRIT PETITION No.11207/2013 (GM-RES)
BETWEEN:
Dr.Ramcharan Thiagarajan, FACS
Aged 43 years
S/o K.Thiagarajan,
No.303, "G" Block,
Raheja Residency,
Koramangala III Block,
Bangalore - 560 034.                     ...PETITIONER
( By Shri.C.V.Nagesh, Senior Advocate for SHri M.R.Aneel,
Advocate)
AND:
1. Medical Council of India,
Sector - VIII, Pocket - 14,
Dwaraka represented by its
Chairperson,
NEW DELHI.
2. Karnataka Medical Council,
No.70, 2nd floor, Vaidyakiya Bhavana,
K.R.Road, (Near Basavanagudi Post Office),
Basavanagudi represented by its
                                 2
Registrar,
Bangalore - 560004.
3. Maj.Pankaj Rai (Retd.)
No.211, Best Township,
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
1

--- PAGE 2 ---

S. Medahalli (Opp.Punjabi Dhaba),
Sarjapur, Attibele Road,
Bangalore - 562 107.                  ...RESPONDENTS
(By Shri Zulfikir Kumar Shafi, Advocate for Respondent no.1,
    Shri D.S.Hosmath, Advocate for Respondent no.2,
    Major Pankaj Rai, Party in Person - Respondent no.3)
      This writ petition is filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India praying to quash/set aside the order dated
27.10.2012 passed by Respondent no.1, in striking of the name of
the petitioner from the Indian Medical Register Annexure-A as
well as from the Register of State Medical Council for a period of
one year and etc.
      This petition having been heard and reserved on
26.3.2014 and coming on for pronouncement of orders this day,
the Court delivered the following:-
                                   3
                              ORDER
The facts of the case are as follows:
2. The petitioner is a Medical Practitioner and is a Consultant in Surgical
Gastroenterology and Laparoscopic Surgery. He is also said to be a Multi-organ
Transplant Surgeon and was working as a consultant with M/s Fortis Hospital,
Bangalore.
The petitioner is said to be conferred with innumerable honours both in India and abroad, over the
years in recognition of his expertise and advanced knowledge in the field of organ transplantation.
During the year 2010, Smt. Seema Rai, the wife of the third respondent was said to have been
diagnosed with severe diabetes and end-stage renal failure, was undergoing dialysis treatment at
M/s Fortis Hospital. She was also said to have been registered with the Zonal Co-ordination
Committee of Karnataka (Hereinafter referred to as the "ZCCK", for brevity) for cadaver kidney
transplantation. ZCCK is a body co-ordinating and regulating the harvesting of cadaver organs in
the State of Karnataka. It is stated that this body ensures that whenever a cadaver organ becomes
available, atleast five expectant recipient patients, on a waiting list, are intimated so as to ensure
that atleast one recipient can be identified with a blood group cross match and other compatibility
criteria, so that the cadaver organ is successfully grafted and to ensure that the organ is not lost or
wasted.
It is said that M/s Fortis Hospital had received a call from ZCCK on 1.5.2010, intimating them of the
availability of a kidney for transplantation with reference to Smt.Rai; The hospital is said to have, in
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
2

--- PAGE 3 ---

turn, intimated her and her family and she was immediately admitted to the Emergency Transplant
surgery on the night of 1.5.2010. It transpires that she had waited for a year to be the recipient of the
available organ. It is claimed that Smt.Rai and her family had been adequately counselled during
this waiting period of the procedures and protocols involved.
It is claimed that ZCCK had intimated that pancreas was also available from the same cadaver donor
and that there was no other prospective recipient registered for the same at that point of time with
ZCCK. It is stated that on account of Smt.Rai being a severe diabetic, she was to benefit by a
pancreatic transplant as well and hence it is claimed that she and her family were informed. It is
said that after due deliberation, consent was given for the dual transplantation of kidney and
pancreas.
It is stated that on the early morning of 2.5.2010, kidney transplant surgery was successfully carried
out on Smt.Rai. It is thereafter that the pancreas transplantation had been carried out. It transpires
that the patient developed a rare, but serious complication called - disseminated intravascular
coagulation- (abnormal bleeding). Over the next three days, it is stated, the patient required
multiple units of blood, plasma, platelets etc., to control the bleeding and she did appear to recover -
but on the third day after surgery, she is said to have developed high fever and died the following
day on account of sepsis.
It is stated that the third respondent who, it is claimed, had not raised any complaint or grievance
during the treatment and surgery, is said to have lodged a complaint before the J.P.Nagar Police
Station, as on 2.6.2010, accusing the petitioner and a Nephrologist, who had treated the deceased
for her renal failure, of acts of negligence. This is said to have been followed by a complaint against
them before the Karnataka Medical Council (Hereinafter referred to as the 'KMC', for brevity). On
the basis of the criminal complaint, the police are said to have registered a case for offences
punishable under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. It is claimed that the investigation
in the criminal case was incomplete as on the date of this petition.
The KMC had held an enquiry against the petitioner and another in respect of the complaint and
after a full fledged enquiry, had held that there was no case made out indicating negligence or
violation of the Code of Medical Ethics - on the part of the petitioner or others and exonerated them
by an order dated 2.6.2011.
The third respondent is said to have filed a complaint before the Karnataka State Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission (KSCDRC) complaining of medical negligence and has claimed
damages quantified at Rs.84.56 lakh.
The third respondent is also said to have lodged a complaint with the Department of Health and
Family Welfare Services, seeking action against the hospital and the doctors concerned. It is stated
that one Dr.V.Raju, Joint Director (Medical), Department of Health and Family Welfare, was
nominated to conduct an enquiry. On a preliminary enquiry, the said Dr.Raju, is said to have given a
finding that the treatment given to the patient was appropriate and that no fault could be found with
the hospital, the doctors or its staff. The third respondent is said to have questioned the said finding
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
3

--- PAGE 4 ---

before the Appropriate Authority, alleging that there was an unfair bias in having arrived at the
finding and that the enquiry was not properly conducted. The Appropriate Authority is said to have
ordered a further enquiry under the provisions of the Transplantation of Human Organs and
Tissues Act, 1994 (Hereinafter referred to as the "HOTA", for brevity). The said Authority, after
conducting a detailed enquiry, gave its finding to the effect that the primary allegation as to M/s
Fortis Hospital not being authorized to conduct multi-organ transplantations, was not tenable and
gave the hospital a clean chit, by its order dated 22.12.2010.
It transpires that the third respondent approached the Lokayuktha with a complaint against the
Chairman of the aforesaid Appropriate Authority. The Lokayuktha, in turn, is said to have called for
a report of a Technical Committee, consisting of three doctors, who were to examine the opinion of
the Appropriate Authority. The said Committee, it appears, had furnished a report disagreeing with
the opinion of the Appropriate Authority. On the basis of the same, the third respondent having
approached the Appropriate Authority over again, the said Authority had issued a show cause notice
to the hospital and ultimately reversed its earlier opinion and held that M/s Fortis hospital was not
authorized to conduct transplantation of pancreas and recommended for cancellation of the license
granted to the hospital for transplantation of human organs and cancelled the certificate of
registration, by its Order dated 12.9.2011. But even in the said review, the Appropriate Authority had
held that there was a valid consent by the patient and her family and that there was no negligence on
the part of the petitioner.
The Lokayuktha had, however, by an order dated 9.9.2011 held that it had no authority to enquire
into the decision of the Appropriate Authority.
The third respondent had also questioned the earlier Order dated 22.10.2010 passed by the
Appropriate Authority before this court by way of a writ petition in WP 6523/2011 and the same was
disposed of by an order dated 8.9.2011, directing the Appropriate Authority to dispose of the second
complaint expeditiously .
The Hospital is said to have challenged the Order dated 12.9.2011 passed by the Appropriate
Authority by way of an appeal before an Appellate Authority, namely, the Secretary, Department of
Health and Family Welfare, Government of Karnataka. The said appeal is said to have been
dismissed by an order dated 24.11.2011. The same is said to have been challenged before this court
by way of a writ petition in WP 45437/2011, the same was allowed and the matter was remitted back
to the Appropriate Authority for a fresh consideration, while restraining the Hospital from
performing transplantation surgeries during the pendency of the matter. That portion of the order
restraining the Hospital from carrying on any transplantation surgeries was said to have been stayed
in an appeal preferred before a division bench of this court in WA 8767/2012.
The third respondent is said to have challenged the order dated 2.6.2011 passed by the KMC -
exonerating the petitioner of any act of negligence before the Medical Council of India (Hereinafter
referred to as the 'MCI', for brevity). By an order dated 27.10.2012, the said appeal is said to have
been allowed and the name of the petitioner was ordered to have been removed from the Indian
Medical Register (IMR) for a period of one year, holding that the petitioner operated on Smt.Rai in a
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
4

--- PAGE 5 ---

Hospital, which did not possess a valid license issued by a competent authority for conducting
surgery for pancreas transplantation and that he had failed to obtain informed consent for the entire
process of kidney and pancreas transplantation. The said order is said to have been approved by the
Board of Governors on 10.12.2012 and the same having been communicated to the petitioner by a
letter dated 19.2.2013, the same is under challenge in this petition.
3. The learned Senior Advocate Shri C.V.Nagesh, appearing on behalf of the counsel for the
petitioner contends as follows :
The impugned Order which seeks to reverse the finding that M/s Fortis Hospital was
duly licensed to conduct kidney and pancreas transplantation is a bald and cryptic
order - which does not discuss the voluminous material evidence in support of the
finding and is hence liable to be set aside on that ground alone.
Elaborating further, it is pointed out that the Hospital had made three separate
applications dated 18.1.2010 to the Director, Health and Family Welfare Services,
Government of Karnataka, seeking Certificates of Registration to conduct
transplantation under the following categories, which are as specified under the
Transplantation of Human Organs Rules, 1995 (Hereinafter referred to as the 'THO'
Rules, for brevity) namely :
(i)Kidney transplantation;
(ii)Transplantation of liver and other abdominal organs;
(iii)Cardiac, pulmonary, cardio-pulmonary transplantation Pursuant to the filing of
such applications, it is said that a Committee constituted by the Appropriate
Authority ,had inspected the Hospital and verified that it has the facilities and the
required Specialists for the said purpose and on being satisfied, the Appropriate
Authority is said to have issued a Certificate of Registration dated 25.3.2010. The said
Certificate was in respect of the following:
(i)Kidney
(ii)Liver
(iii)Homograft ( permitted usage only) It is contended that under HOTA, separate
registration for pancreas, intestines or other abdominal organs is neither granted nor
is necessary, since all these are grouped under the same category, namely, "liver and
other abdominal organs." It is also pointed out that there is no reference to pancreas
anywhere in the HOTA or the Rules thereto. Attention is drawn to the opinion
expressed by the then Joint Director, (Medical), Dr. H.C.Ramesh, when the very
point was raised before the Appellate Authority, to the effect that it is not the practice
in issuing certification to name all the organs as for instance in the category "Liver", it
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
5

--- PAGE 6 ---

is not necessary to mention all other abdominal organs. Pancreas is one of the
abdominal organs.
It is contended that this opinion is also endorsed by Dr.V.Raju, Joint Director (Medical), who had
testified before the KMC, to state : "Fortis Hospital has a license to perform pancreas
transplantation as they already have permission to perform liver transplantation which includes
pancreas and other abdominal organs".
It is hence contended that in the absence of any discussion in the impugned order, the basis for any
conclusion drawn is not known and hence leads to a miscarriage of justice.
It is further contended that the KMC had considered the entire material placed before it in depth
and an unanimous opinion was formed by the Council that there was no negligence or violation of
the Code of Medical ethics, on the part of the doctors, who performed the transplant surgery on
Smt.Rai. The contention of the third respondent that there was no informed consent either of the
patient, or the attendant of the patient, had been negatived both by the Appropriate Authority as
well as the Appellate Authority. This is completely overlooked by the first respondent in passing the
impugned order.
It is contended that consent of a patient undergoing organ transplantation is not the mere signature
on a form, but is a long process of the patient being made to understand the implication of the
surgery, and preparing the patient and her family mentally and the actual procedure is carried out
only on being absolutely certain about the patient's physical state, before planning on the surgery.
This was fully complied with by the team of doctors who attended on the patient in the present case,
to the knowledge of the third respondent. The document itself, evidencing such consent is a
necessary formality. In any event, the same had been accepted by more than one authority.
However, the first respondent has negated the same even in the absence of any contra material or
circumstances.
4. On the other hand, the third respondent, Major Pankaj Rai (retired), appearing in person would
contend as follows:
The petitioner has an alternative remedy of an appeal under Section 24 of the Indian
Medical Council Act,1956 (Hereinafter referred to as the 'IMC Act', for brevity), as
against the impugned order and hence the petition would have to be rejected on that
ground alone.
It is contended that the petitioner was well aware of the limitations of the
transplantation license granted to M/s Fortis Hospital and in particular, the fact that
the Hospital did not have the license to carry out transplantation of organs except
those specifically stated in the license. The petitioner was also aware of Rule 4A of the
THO Rules that prohibited him from carrying out transplantation surgery since he
was also the Medical Co- ordinator of ZCCK. Despite being so aware, the petitioner
willfully had violated the HOTA and the THO Rules. Consequently, the impugned
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
6

--- PAGE 7 ---

order insofar as it relates to the petitioner is appropriate.
It is contended that the petitioner and its personnel, including the doctors concerned,
had failed to comply with the license conditions relating to appropriate disclosures
mandated against the petitioner and also the mandates in relation to requisite
awareness and psychological evaluation, to procure an "informed consent". In effect,
the petitioner has failed to comply with Section 12 of the HOTA, which is a
mandatory provision. Relevant depositions of the personnel of the petitioner -
Hospital amply evidence the above position. Further, even ZCCK, in response to a
query under the Right to Information Act, 2005, has expressed that it was unaware of
the petitioner - Hospital not having a license for transplantation of Pancreas. It is
thus clear that M/s Fortis Hospital had failed to discharge its fiduciary duties towards
Smt.Rai and her family and violated the trust reposed in the petitioner - Hospital by
her and her family.
It is contended that in so far as the claim that the applications for Certificate of
Registration to conduct transplantation of all abdominal organs was granted, is
misleading and incorrect. It is contended that in fact, only the covering letters,
accompanying the applications, contained the above description and not the
applications themselves. The applications are organ specific and so are licenses and
registrations granted to a transplant centre. Therefore, M/s Fortis Hospital had made
applications under Form No.11 specifically and only for transplantation of Kidney,
Liver, Heart with Homograft. M/s Fortis Hospital had also included the organ -
Pancreas in its application for the organ - Liver. Since separate applications are
required to be made for each organ, the application of M/s Fortis Hospital was
defective to the extent of containing Pancreas as an additional organ in the
application for Liver. Consequently, the license for Pancreas was not granted to M/s
Fortis Hospital. The petitioner was well aware that the Hospital did not pay the
prescribed fee for the organ Pancreas nor had made a separate application as
required in law. Consequently, the inspection committee did not recommend
Pancreas, as part of license, for transplantation. The Hospital did not file an appeal
within thirty days and allowed the matter of registration for Kidney, Liver and
Homograft to reach finality.
It is further contended that a license granted under the HOTA is organ specific and
separate licenses are granted for specified organs under the HOTA. The Government
of Karnataka has issued specified licenses for transplantation of Pancreas to M/s
Narayana Hrudayalaya, M/s Columbia Asia Hospital and M/s BGS Global Hospital.
The Government of Tamil Nadu has also issued a Certificate granting license for
Pancreas to M/s Global Hospital, Chennai. Similarly, in Delhi, M/s Apollo Hospital
and All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) have been granted separate
licenses for Pancreas. The term "human organ" is defined clearly in Section 2(h) of
the HOTA and the HOTA does not make any specific mention to any of the organs in
a human body. The petitioner has been granted permission for 'Homograft', however,
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
7

--- PAGE 8 ---

even 'Homograft' does not appear in the HOTA, nor for that matter, the lower bowel.
The Director General of Health Services, Government of India, by its letter dated
31.5.2011 has clarified that the license for Liver does not include 'Pancreas' and
violation of this is punishable with both imprisonment and fine. The Public
Information Officer of the Appropriate Authority for Organ Transplantation,
Government of Karnataka, also clarified explicitly, by a letter of August 2011, that
license for transplantation of Liver does not provide blanket permission for
transplantation of other abdominal organs (Pancreas/Lower bowel) as well. Further,
even the THO Rules in general and Rule 9(C) in particular, that is being referred to
by the petitioner, are merely indicative and not exhaustive or suggestive of being
exhaustive. It refers to 'experts and their qualifications' and not to the registration of
Hospitals under the HOTA. The said position has been clarified by the Director
General of Health Services by his letter dated 15.11.2011. However, it is contended
that the petitioner is attempting to misinterpret the THO Rules to suit his
convenience. The same is baseless and without any merit.
It is further contended that the following circumstances would indicate that an
informed consent as mandated under the Act was never taken from the patient.
a. Smt.Seema Rai, the patient had not signed the "Informed Consent Form". The Act
stipulates that the consent be given by the patient (recipient) only.
b. According to license condition No.3, the patient is required to be explained and be
given a booklet in English and Kannada with detailed information about the
investigations to be done, possible complications during investigations,
transplantation and thereafter, appropriate assessment of the costs, risks and
alternatives. This was never done. The petitioner has explicitly deposed before the
KMC that he had explained the benefits and risks of combined transplant to
Mrs.Seema Rai, but had not recorded the same.
c. Dr.Rajanna Sreedhara, the Nephrologist has deposed before the KMC on 3.2.2011
and said "I have not advised regarding Pancreas transplant along with kidney
transplant". The petitioner was introduced to the patient for the first time at about
9.45PM on 1.5.2010 for the first time. The petitioner advised the patient for
simultaneous Kidney and Pancreas transplant for the very first time.
d. A pre-requisite before taking the informed consent was evaluation by the cardiologist. In the
Cadaver Kidney Transplantation Pre-Operative Recipient Orders, Dr.Rajanna Sreedhara had
directed "References to the following for pre- operative assessment and clearance - Dr.Venkatesh
Cardiologist". However, in his deposition before the KMC on 3.2.2011 he has deposed that, "I did
not feel that there was a need for a Cardiologist evaluating at the time of admission". The Hospital
records of 1.5.2010 states, "Informed Dr.Venkatesh about the admission and reference. Sir told that
he will come and see the patient tomorrow".
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
8

--- PAGE 9 ---

e. The third respondent was advised to procure an immune suppressant drug (Simulect) in the event
of surgery. The drug is required to be administered prior to surgery. However, the surgery was
started before the complainant reached the Hospital as is evidenced from the hospital records.
Incision was made at 7.30A.M. and the drug was administered at 8.15 A.M. f. The patient's daughter
was woken up in the morning and asked to sign a form and write her mother's name stating that the
patient has to be taken for a routine medical test. The daughter did not realise that she had been
asked to sign on the consent form and the petitioner - Hospital has taken advantage of the same.
g. Suppression of the fact that the Hospital does not have a license for Pancreas renders any kind of
consent null and void.
It is contended that it is clear from the averments of the petitioner that the petitioner had harvested
Pancreas even before any consent was given by Smt.Seema Rai for the transplantation surgery.
Thus, it is evident that the petitioner and M/s Fortis Hospital had already planned to carry out
transplantation of Pancreas even before Smt.Seema Rai had consented to such transplantation.
Thus, the violation of Section 12 of the HOTA is clearly evident from the aforementioned actions of
the petitioner. Apart from Section 12 of the HOTA, transplantation surgery without procuring
informed consent is violation of Regulation 7.16 of Code of Ethics Regulations of MCI. Thus, the
petitioner deserves to be awarded a higher punishment than what has been awarded in the
impugned order.
In the light of the above facts and circumstances, the following points arise for consideration :
(i)Whether the MCI possessed the jurisdiction to impose the punishment on the
petitioner in the appeal filed by the third respondent.?
(ii)Whether there is a remedy of appeal available to the petitioner against the
impugned order.?
(iii)Whether the order of the MCI can be sustained as being in accordance with
principles of law and justice.?
Point no.(i) :
The MCI is a statutory autonomous body established under the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956 (Hereinafter referred to as the "IMC Act", for brevity) and is
functioning under the administrative control of the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare of the Government of India. Its functions are,
(i) Maintenance of standards of medical education in the country;
(ii) to provide registration to the individuals who qualify as doctors from the
recognised institutions in India or abroad which is included in the Schedule to the
IMC Act;
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
9

--- PAGE 10 ---

(iii) to hold inquiry or disciplinary action against a registered medical practitioner
with regard to any professional misconduct;
(iv) Grant of Letter of permission/renewal of permission in respect of different
medical colleges in India after conducting the inspection of those colleges etc. That
Section 20A of the IMC Act empowers the Council to prescribe standards of
professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics for medical professionals.
Further, Section 33(m) of the IMC Act empowers the respondent - MCI to frame
regulations in that behalf. The said provisions of the IMC Act read as under:
"20A. Professional Conduct - (1) The Council may prescribe standards of professional
conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for medical practitioners.
(2) Regulations made by the Council under sub-
section (1) may specify which violations thereof shall constitute infamous conduct in any
professional respect, that is to say, professional misconduct, and such provision shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force.
xxx
33. Power to make Regulations The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central
Government, make regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice
to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide for:-
..............
(m) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be
observed by medical practitioners;..."
That in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 20A read with Section 33(m) of the IMC Act,
the MCI has framed the Indian Medical Council (Professional conduct, Etiquette and Ethics)
Regulations, 2002, inter alia, prescribing the inclusive definition of 'professional misconduct', the
appropriate council for dealing with cases of professional misconduct, provisions of appeal etc. The
relevant portion of the Ethics Regulations, 2002 relevant for the present controversy is quoted
hereunder:
"7. MISCONDUCT:
The following acts of commission or omission on the part of a physician shall
constitute professional misconduct rendering him/her liable for disciplinary action:
...
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
10

--- PAGE 11 ---

7.16 Before performing an operation the physician should obtain in writing the
consent from the husband or wife, parent or guardian in the case of minor, or the
patient himself as the case may be. In an operation which may result in sterility the
consent of both husband and wife is needed.
8. PUNISHMENT AND DISCIPLINARY ACTION 8.1 It must be clearly understood
that the instances of offences and of Professional misconduct which are given above
do not constitute and are not intended to constitute a complete list of the infamous
acts, which calls for disciplinary action, and that by issuing this notice the MCI and or
State Medical Councils are in no way precluded from considering and dealing with
any other form of professional misconduct on the part of a registered practitioner.
Circumstances may and do arise from time to time in relation to which there may
occur questions of professional misconduct which do not come within any of these
categories. Every care should be taken that the code is not violated in letter or spirit.
In such instances as in all others, the MCI and or State Medical Councils brought
before the MCI and or State Medical Councils.
8.2 It is made clear that any complaint with regard to professional misconduct can be
brought before the appropriate Medical Council for disciplinary action. Upon receipt
of any complaint of professional misconduct, the appropriate Medical Council would
hold an enquiry and give an opportunity to the registered medical practitioner to be
heard in person or by pleader. If the medical practitioner is found to be guilty of
committing professional misconduct, the appropriate Medical Council may award
such punishment as deemed necessary or may direct the removal altogether or for a
specified period, from the register of the name of the delinquent registered
practitioner. Deletion from the Register shall be widely publicized in local press as
well as in the publications of different Medical Associations/ Societies/Bodies.
8.3 In case the punishment of removal from the register is for a limited period, the
appropriate Council may also direct that the name so removed shall be restored in
the register after the expiry of the period for which the name was ordered to be
removed...."
That the disciplinary punishment has been imposed on the petitioner for two misconducts; firstly,
that the petitioner has performed an organ transplantation surgery in a hospital which was not
having the required statutory permission for conducting such procedure and secondly, that the
petitioner has not taken the appropriate informed consent of the patient/attendant in respect of all
the surgical procedures conducted on the patient.
It is evident from a plain reading of the above cited provisions that the MCI has the power and
jurisdiction to impose the punishment in question.
Point no. (ii) : The IMC Act contemplates the maintenance of a Register of Medical Practitioners
known as the Indian Medical Register, which contains the names of all persons who are enrolled on
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
11

--- PAGE 12 ---

any State Medical Register. The Registrar of a State Medical Council is required to inform the MCI
of all additions and other amendments made, immediately; apart from furnishing a yearly statement
on the first day of April, each year. Section 24 of the IMC Act reads thus :
"24. Removal of names from the Indian Medical Register :- If the name of any person
enrolled on a State Medical Register is removed therefrom in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under any law relating to registration of medical practitioners for the
time being in force in any State, the Council shall direct the removal of the name of
such person from the Indian Medical Register. (2) Where the name of any person has
been removed from a State Medical Register on the ground of professional
misconduct or any other ground except that he is not possessed of the requisite
medical qualifications or where any application made by the said person for
restoration of his name to the State Medical Register has been rejected, he may
appeal in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions including conditions
as to the payment of a fee as may be laid down in rules made by the Central
Government in this behalf, to the Central Government, whose decision, which shall
be given after consulting the Council, shall be binding on the State Government and
on the authorities concerned with the preparation of the State Medical Register."
It is seen that the petitioner's name is not ordered to be removed from the State Medical Register
pursuant to any order passed under the provisions of the Karnataka Medical Registration Act ,1961,
which is apparently contemplated under the above Section. Rather the power exercised is traceable
to Regulations 8.2 and 8.3 of the IMC (Professional, Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations ,
2002. There is no appeal remedy provided against the same.
Point no.(iii) :
The entire text of the impugned order is produced herewith, for ready reference, in
proceeding to consider this point .
"Appeal against order dated 02.06.2011 passed by Karnataka Medical Council filed by
Sh.Pankaj Rai (F.No.102/2011):
The Ethics Committee considered the appeal filed by Sh.Pankaj Rai against the order
dated 02.06.2011 passed by Karnataka Medical Council and after deliberating on the
matter at length, the Committee is of the view that in this case the treating surgeon
namely, Dr.Ramacharan Thiagarajan, Fortis Hospital, Bangalore operated in the
hospital which was not possessing valid permission issued by Competent Authority
for conducting the surgery for pancreas transplant and failed to take proper informed
consent for the entire procedure of kidney and pancreas transplant surgery.
Therefore, the Ethics Committee found that Dr.Ram Charan Thiagarajan had violated
the Indian Medical Council Regulations, especially Clause 7.16 and the hospital
authorities were found to be working illegally as they could not prevent pancreatic
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
12

--- PAGE 13 ---

transplant surgery in their hospital, as they did not possess any valid permission to
do so. In view of the above, the Committee decided to impose the following
punishment :
The name of Dr.Ram Charan Thiagarajan be struck of from the Indian Medical
Register as well as from the Register of State Medical Council for a period of one (01)
year. The Fortis Hospital is found to have performed pancreatic transplant surgery
without valid permission from the competent authority. The Govt. of Karnataka
(Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare) is requested to take suitable action
against the hospital management for conducting pancreatic transplant surgery
without valid permission to do so.
(Dr.P.Prasannaraj) Additional Secretary (PROF. SNEH BHARGAVA)
CHAIRPERSON (Dr. Y.K.Gupta) (Dr.Chander S.Shetty) (Dr.Atul Sood) Member
Member Member (Dr. B.G.Tilak) (Dr. G.K.Sharma) (Amit Bansal)(Advocate)
Member Member Member "
It is to be kept in view that the MCI has proceeded to reverse concurrent findings of fact in favour of
the petitioner. This required that the Council record its reasons. This is a well recognized principle.
In a recent decision of the apex court, Ravi Yashwant Bhoir V. Collector (2012) 4 SCC 407, on a
review of the case law in this regard, it is opined thus :
"38. It is a settled proposition of law that even in administrative matters, the reasons
should be recorded as it is incumbent upon the authorities to pass a speaking and
reasoned order. In Shrilekha Vidyarthi . v. State of U.P., AIR 1991 SC 537, this Court
has observed as under:-
"36.....Every such action may be informed by reason and if follows that an act
un-informed by reason is arbitrary, the rule of law contemplates governance by laws
and not by humour, whim or caprice of the men to whom the governance is entrusted
for the time being. It is the trite law that 'be you ever so high, the laws are above you.'
This is what men in power must remember always'.
40. In L.I.C. v. Consumer Education and Research Centre, AIR 1995 SC 1811, this
Court observed that the State or its instrumentality must not take any irrelevant or
irrational factor into consideration or appear arbitrary in its decision. "Duty to act
fairly" is part of fair procedure envisaged under Articles 14 and 21. Every activity of
the public authority or tthose under public duty must be received and guided by the
public interest. A similar view has been reiterated by this Court in Union of India v.
Mohan Lal Capoor, AIR 1974 SC 87 and Mahesh Chandra v. U.P. Financial
Corporation, AIR 1993 SC 935.
41. In State of W.B. v. Atul Krishna Shaw, AIR 1990 SC 2205, this Court observed
that: (SCC p.421, para7) "7.... Giving of reasons is an essential element of
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
13

--- PAGE 14 ---

administration of justice. A right to reason is, therefore, an indispensable part of
sound system of judicial review."
42. In S.N. Mukherjee v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1984, it has been held that the object
underlying the rules of natural justice is to prevent miscarriage of justice and secure fair play in
action. The expanding horizon of the principles of natural justice provides for requirement to record
reasons as it is now regarded as one of the principles of natural justice, and it was held in the above
case that except in cases where the requirement to record reasons is expressly or by necessary
implication dispensed with, the authority must record reasons for its decision.
43. In Krishna Swami v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 1407, this Court observed that the rule of law
requires that any action or decision of a statutory or public authority must be founded on the reason
stated in the order or borne-out from the record. The Court further observed: (SCC p.637 para 47) "
47... Reasons are the links between the material, the foundation for their erection and the actual
conclusions. They would also demonstrate how the mind of the maker was activated and actuated
and their rational nexus and synthesis with the facts considered and the conclusions reached. Lest it
would be arbitrary, unfair and unjust, violating Article 14 or unfair procedure offending Article 21"
44. This Court while deciding the issue in Sant Lal Gupta. v. Modern Co-operative
Group Housing Society Ltd., (2010) 13 SCC 336, placing reliance on its various earlier
judgments held as under: (SCC pp345- 346 para 27) "27. It is a settled legal
proposition that not only administrative but also judicial orders must be supported
by reasons, recorded in it. Thus, while deciding an issue, the Court is bound to give
reasons for its conclusion. It is the duty and obligation on the part of the Court to
record reasons while disposing of the case. The hallmark of order and exercise of
judicial power by a judicial forum is for the forum to disclose its reasons by itself and
giving of reasons has always been insisted upon as one of the fundamentals of sound
administration of the justice - delivery system, to make it known that there had been
proper and due application of mind to the issue before the Court and also as an
essential requisite of the principles of natural justice.
'3.......The giving of reasons for a decision is an essential attribute of judicial and
judicious disposal of a matter before Courts, and which is the only indication to know
about the manner and quality of exercise undertaken, as also the fact that the Court
concerned had really applied its mind.' The reason is the heartbeat of every
conclusion. It introduces clarity in an order and without the same, the order becomes
lifeless. Reasons substitute subjectivity with objectivity. The absence of reasons
renders an order indefensible/unsustainable particularly when the order is subject to
further challenge before a higher forum. Recording of reasons is principle of natural
justice and every judicial order must be supported by reasons recorded in writing. It
ensures transparency and fairness in decision making. The person who is adversely
affected must know why his application has been rejected."
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
14

--- PAGE 15 ---

45. In Institute of Chartered Accountants of India v. L.K. Ratna, AIR 1987 SC 71, this Court held that
on charge of misconduct the authority holding the inquiry must record reasons for reaching its
conclusion and record clear findings. The Court further held: (SCC P.558 para30) "30.... In fairness
and justice, the member is entitled to know why he has been found guilty. The case can be so serious
that it can attract the harsh penalties provided by the Act. Moreover, the member has been given a
right of appeal to the High Court under S. 22A of the Act. To exercise his right of appeal effectively,
he must know the basis on which the Council has found him guilty. We have already pointed out
that a finding by the Council is the first determinative finding on the guilt of the member. It is a
finding by a Tribunal of first instance. The conclusion of the Disciplinary Committee does not enjoy
the status of a 'finding'. Moreover, the reasons contained in the report by the Disciplinary
Committee for its conclusion may or may not constitute the basis of the finding rendered by the
Council. The Council must, therefore, state the reasons for its finding".
46. The emphasis on recording reason is that if the decision reveals the `inscrutable face of the
sphinx', it can by its silence, render it virtually impossible for the courts to perform their appellate
function or exercise the power of judicial review in adjudging the validity of the decision. Right to
reason is an indispensable part of a sound judicial system, reasons at least sufficient to indicate an
application of mind of the authority before the court. Another rationale is that the affected party can
know why the decision has gone against him. One of the salutary requirements of natural justice is
spelling out reasons for the order made. In other words, a speaking out, the inscrutable face of the
sphinx is ordinarily incongruous with a judicial or quasi-judicial performance.
xxx In Principles of Administrative Law, authored by Shri M.P.Jain and Shri S.N.Jain, Fifth Edition,
it is opined as follows:-
Adjudicatory bodies in an area may be arranged in a hierarchical structural order.
Before Siemens, the question was considered by the Supreme Court in several cases
whether all such bodies must give reasons for their decisions when a case moves from
the lower to the higher body. Here the courts have considered several alternative
situations.
(i) The lower authority itself may not give reasons, or may give nebulous or scrappy
reasons. If the appellate authority merely affirms such an order without giving any
reasons, the order of the appellant authority will be bad.
(ii) Where, however, the facts are so notorious that the reasons for the administrative
action are too obvious and could not possibly be questioned by anybody, the fact that
no reasons were given by the revision authority may not vitiate the action (See:
Nandram Hunatram vs. Union of India, AIR 1966 SC 1922).
(iii) It has also been held that reasons ought to be given by the appellate authority where it is
endorsing the order of the lower authority but the order of the latter contains several reasons some
of which are good and some bad. The appellate body should at least indicate clearly that it was
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
15

--- PAGE 16 ---

accepting the reasons given by the lower authority. (See: Bhagat Raja v. Union of India, AIR 1967 SC
1606 at 1610).
(iv) An appellate authority must give reasons where it is reversing the order of the lower authority,
whether the latter has given reasons or not.
(v) A ticklish question is raised, however, when an authority makes a reasoned order and the
appellate authority merely affirms it. Should the appellate body give its own reasons in such a
situation?
Earlier a view was expressed that no reasons need be given by the appellate body in such a situation
because it could be assumed that it had accepted the reasons given by the lower authority.(See:
M.P.Industries vs. Union of India, AIR 1966 SC 671; CIT vs. Pilliah, (1967) 63 ITR 411 SC). But then
the judicial view underwent a change and it came to be ruled that the appellate body should give its
own reasons even though it is affirming a reasoned decision of the lower body; at least it should be
indicated clearly by the appellate authority that it was accepting the reasons given by the lower
authority (See: Bhagat Raja v. Union of India, AIR 1967 SC 1606) .
The said authors have further opined that the simplest and most effective rule to follow in
adjudicatory proceedings will be that every body, appellate or original, should give its reasons for its
decision irrespective of any consideration, unless there is some reason (security or public interest)
for not doing so. The appellate body should give its own reasons irrespective of the fact whether it is
affirming the decision of the lower body and whether the lower body has given its own reasons.
In "Writs Law and Practice" authored by Shri M.R.Malick, it is opined as follows:-
Except in cases where the requirement of recording of reasons has been dispensed
with expressly or by necessary implication, an administrative authority exercising
judicial or quasi-judicial functions must record the reasons for its decision. Such a
decision is subject to the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article
136 as well as the supervisory jurisdiction of High Court under Article 227 and the
reasons, if recorded, would enable the Supreme Court or High Courts to effectively
exercise the appellate or supervisory power. But this is not the sole consideration.
Other considerations for the requirement of recording reasons are - (i) to guarantee
consideration by the authority; (ii) to introduce clarity in the decision; and (iii) to
minimize chances of arbitrariness in decision making. However, it is not required
that the reasons should be as elaborate as in the decision of a court of law. The extent
and nature of the reasons would depend on particular facts and circumstances (See:
D.B. Raji v H.J. Kantharaj (1990) 4 SCC
178).
However, act of recording reasons may differ from case to case.
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
16

--- PAGE 17 ---

Recording of reasons are sufficient which may be discernible from the order itself or
contemporaneous record. Therefore, the reasons need not be contained in the order itself,
administrative order itself may contain reasons or the file may disclose reasons to arrive at the
decision showing application of mind to the facts in issue (See: M.J. Shirani v. State of Karnataka,
AIR 1995 SC 1770; (1995) 6 SCC 289).
In his "Commentary on the Constitution of India" by Acharya Dr. Durga Das Basu, Eighth Edition,
Volume 7, it is opined as follows:-
The English Law did not till recently, recognise a general duty to give reasons for an
administrative decision. (See: R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
exparte Doody, (1994)1 AC 531: (1993)3 WLR 154 : (1993)3 All ER 92; R v.
Secretary of State for the Home Department exparte Fayed, (1998)1 WLR 763: (1997)1 All ER 228.)
Nevertheless, it was equally beyond doubt that such a duty "may in appropriate circumstances be
implied" (by LORD MUSATILL in Doody's case) or as was said in Fayed's case "it may be a case
which is crying for reasons". An analysis of factors which will often be material to such an
implication is to be found in R v. Civil Service Appeal Board exparte Cunningham, (1991)4 All ER
311, wherein it was observed: "The principles of public law will require that those affected by
decisions are given the reason for those decisions in some cases, but not in others".
It was held that the absence of reasons for a decision where there is no duty to give them cannot of
itself provide any support for the suggested irrationality of the decision. The only significance of the
absence of reasons is that if all other known facts and circumstances appear to point over
whelmingly in favour of a different decision, the decision maker who has given no reason cannot
complain if the court draws the inference that he had no rational reason for his decision. (See: R vs.
Secretary of State for Trade & Industry exp. Lmbro Plc., (1989) 1 WLR 525; Padfield vs. Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, (1968)AC 1997).
Natural justice demands that (1) the applicant be informed of the nature of the case against him; and
(2) he be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard. And, as has been said, if "opportunity to be
heard is to have any value in practice", the decision maker must assign or identify the reason for any
adverse decision. (See: R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department exparte Fayed, (1998)1
WLR 763: (1997)1 All ER 228.). Thus, the right of hearing and the duty to give reasons are related,
one with the other, and failure to give reasons is, where there is a duty to give reasons, treated as
breach of natural justice."
In USA, the need for an agency to state the reasons was not consistent till 1990. In Dunlop vs.
Bachowski (1975) 421 US 560, the court held that the agency was required " a statement of reasons
....... And the essential facts upon which the .... Inferences are based, even though there was no
statutory requirement of findings or reasons.
The Supreme Court of India has held that withholding reasons amounted to denial of opportunity of
hearing (See: Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597).
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
17

--- PAGE 18 ---

In S.N.Mukherjee vs. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1984, it was observed that except in cases where
the requirement of recording of reasons has been dispensed with expressly or by necessary
implication, an administrative authority exercising judicial or quasi-judicial function must record
reason for its decision. In another case, the court observed that though the principles of natural
justice do not require reasons for decision, there is necessity for giving reasons in view of expanding
law of judicial review to enable the citizens to discover the reasoning behind the decision. Right to
reason is an indispensable part of a sound system of judicial review. Under our Constitution, an
administrative decision is subject to judicial review if it affects the rights of citizens; it is, therefore,
desirable that reasons should be stated. (See: Union of India vs. Nambudiri, AIR 1991 SC 1216).
In Seimens Engg. Co. v. Union of India, AIR 1976 SC 1785, it was held that rule requiring reasons to
be recorded is a basic principle of natural justice. (See: Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978
SC 597; State of West Bengal v. Atul Krishna Shaw, AIR 1990 SC 2205). Making a decision without
stating reason is a negation of the rule of law (See: Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar vs. State of U.P.,
AIR 1970 SC 1302 ; Govt. Branch Press v. D.B.belliappa, AIR 1979 SC 429; Ram Chandra vs. Union
of India, AIR 1986 SC 1173). It was held that reasons play a very important factor inasmuch as
reasons disclose how the mind is applied to the subject matter for a decision and that if reasons are
disclosed, in that event, it would reveal the conclusions whether based on actual materials or not.
(See: Union of India v. M.L.Kapoor , AIR 1974 SC 87; Harinagar Sugar Mills v. Shyam Sundar, AIR
1961 SC 1669; Bhagat Raja v. Union of India, AIR 1967 SC 1606; Travancore Rayons v. Union of
India, AIR 1971 SC 862; Rama Varma Bharathan Thampuran v. State of Kerala, AIR 1979 SC 1918).
In Shri Swamiji v. Commissioner, HR & CE, AIR 1980 SC 1, it was held that reason is the soul of law
and when reason of any particular law ceases, so does the law. In Maharashtra State Board of
Secondary & Higher Secondary Education v. K.S.Gandhi,(1991) 2 SCC 716, it was held that reasons
are harbinger between the mind of the maker of the order to the controversy in question and the
decision or conclusion arrived at and they also exclude the chances to reach arbitrary, whimsical or
capricious decision or conclusion. (See: Gurdial Singh Fijji vs. State of Punjab, (1979) 2 SCC 368;
Punjab SEB v. Git Singh, (2009)13 SCC 118).
The purpose of disclosure of reasons is that people must have confidence in judicial and
quasi-judicial authorities. Unless reasons are disclosed, a person cannot know whether or not the
authority concerned has applied its mind. Also, giving reasons minimises the chances of
arbitrariness. It is also an essential requirement of the rule of law (See: Chairman, Disciplinary
Authority, Rani Laxmibai Kshetriya Gramina Bank vs. Jagdish Sharan Varshney, 2009 4 SCC 240).
In "Public Law" by Dr.Mark Elliott and Dr.Robert Thomas, it is stated as follows:-
Fairness as understood at common law may require the giving of reasons. In order to
decide whether this is so, the reviewing court examines the circumstances of the case,
balancing any arguments for and against the giving of reasons in order to come to a
rounded view about what fairness requires. (See: R vs. Higher Education Funding
Council exp Institute of Dental Surgery, (1994)1 WLR 242.) Prominent among the
factors that weigh in favour of the imposition of a reason - giving duty is the
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
18

--- PAGE 19 ---

importance of the right or interest that is at stake. So if, as in R. Secretary of State for
the Home Department exparte Doody, (1994)1 AC 531,564, the decision affects the
claimant's liberty, this will be a strong indication that reasons should be given, as will
the fact that the decision impacts on other important interests such as professional
standing, reputation (See: R v. Ministry of Defence, ex p Murray (1998) COD 134; R
v. City of London Corporation, ex p Matson, (1997)1 WLR 765 or bodily integrity or
bodily integrity (See: R (Wooder) v. Feggetter, (2002)EWCA Civ.554, (2003)QB 219).
A duty to give reasons is also likely to be imposed in respect of decisions that are
aberrant - that is, decisions that, on the face of it, seem inexplicable, perhaps because
they appear to fly in the face of the great weight of evidence (See: R vs. Higher
Education Funding Council exp Institute of Dental Surgery, (1994)1 WLR 242, 263).
On the other hand, the court also has to weigh factors that point away from a duty to
give reasons: this may be so where, for example, giving reasons would place 'an
undue burden on the decision-
maker' or 'call for the articulation of sometimes inexpressible value judgments. (See: R vs. Higher
Education Funding Council exp Institute of Dental Surgery, (1994)1 WLR 242, 257).
In South Buckinghamshire District Council v. Porter, (2004) UKHL 33, (2004)WLR 1953 (36), it
was said that while reasons must enable people to understand why the decision was reached and
what the conclusions were on the main points of controversy, they need refer only to the 'main
issues' and not to 'every material consideration'. It also seems that the court will take into account
the burden that a requirement to give reasons imposes on the decision - maker: where, for example,
decisions are taken by groups of people, it has been held that it would be unduly burdensome to
require each individual decision-maker's thinking to be set out, such that very broad-brush reasons
may suffice in such situations. (See: R(Asha Foundation) v. Millenium Commission (2003) EWCA
Civ.88).
The standard of reasons required are lucidly expounded in De Smith's Judicial Review, 6th Edition:
It remains difficult to state precisely the standard of reasoning the court will demand.
Much depends upon the particular circumstances¹, and the statutory context in
which the duty to give reasons arises. It is clear that the reasons given must be
intelligible and must adequately meet the substance of the arguments
advanced²arguments advanced². It will not suffice to R. (on the application of the
Asha Foundation) v The Millennium Commission, [2003]EWCA Civ 88 at [27];
Flannery and Flannery v Halifax Estate Agencies Ltd. [2000]1 WLR 377 at 382.
2 (Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964] 2 Q.B. 467 at 477-478, is the most
frequently cited judicial articulation of the test of the adequacy of reasons; approved
in Westminster CC v Great Portland Estates Plc [1985] A.C.661 at 673; cf. Save
Britain's Heritage v Number One Poultry Ltd [1991] 1 W.L.R. 153 at 165; and Edwin
H. Bradley and Sons Ltd.
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
19

--- PAGE 20 ---

V Secretary of State for the Environment, (1982) 47 P. & C.R. 374 (same standard was applied
despite the subjective element in the minister's duty under the Town and Country Planning Act 1971
S.9(8) to give such statement as he considers appropriate of the reasons for his decision); Bolton
MBC v. Secretary of State for the Environment (No.2), [1995] 3 P.L.R.37).
merely recite a general formula or restate a statutorily-prescribed conclusion³.
It is also preferable if the reasons demonstrate that a systematic analysis has been undertaken by the
decision-maker4. However, the courts have not attempted to define a uniform standard or threshold
which the reasons must satisfy, and on occasion, courts have expressed concern that
decision-makers be
3. R. v Birmingham City Council Ex.p.B [1999] E.L.R..305 at 311 [Scott Baker J. noting that the
letter sent did "nothing more than make ritual incantation of the two-stage process that is applicable
for deciding these appeals"). However, where the decision involves a clear application of policy,
"[t]he reason is the policy"; R. (on the application of Thompson] v Secretary of State for the Home
Department[2003]EWHC 538 at [41].
4. (See: e.g. R. (on the application of Lowe) v Family Health Services Appeal Authority [2001]
EWCA Civ 128 at [18] (reasons inadequate because they did not deal with the question in correct
"logical sequence"); R. v Crown Court at Cantebury Ex p. Howson-Ball [2001] Env L.R. 36 at [32]
(referring to a need for the Crown Court to provide "some analysis" of the relevant matters); Curtis v
Lodon Rent Assessment Committee [1999] Q.B. 92 at 118-119 (the rent assessment committee's duty
to give reasons required some "working through", i.e. an arithmetical explanation, of the
assessment)). granted "a certain latitude in how they express themselves"5. The reasons must
generally state the decision-maker's material findings of fact (and, if the facts were disputed at the
hearing, their evidential support6 and meet the substance of the principal arguments that the
decision-maker was required to consider. If a decision is made on the basis of the evidence of
witnesses or experts, reasons for preferring one witness or expert over another should generally be
explained.7 In short, the reasons must show
5. (R. v Brent London LBC Ex p. Baruwa (1997) 29 H.L.R. 915 at 929, approved in William v
Wandsworth LBC [2006] EWCA Civ 535; [2006] H.L.R. 42 at [18].)
6. (Cf. R. v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p. Swati [1986] 1 W.L.R. 477 (passenger
refused entry entitled only to be told the ground for refusal; statement of facts required only after
notice of appeal is given.))
7. (R. (on the application of H) v Ashworth Hospital Authority [2002] EWCA Civ 923; [2003] 1
W.LRr. 127 at [81]' R. (on the application of Bushell) v Newcastle Upon Tyne Licensing Justice
[2004] EWHC 446 at [41] cf. R. (on the application of Alliss) v Legal Services Commission [2002]
EWHC 2079 at [65].) that the decision-maker successfully came to grips with the main contentions
advanced by the parties8, and must tell the parties in broad terms why they lost or, as the case may
be, won'9.
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
20

--- PAGE 21 ---

8. (In addition to Re Poyser [1964]2 Q.B. 467 authority for the proposition in the text can be found,
e.g. in: R. v Immigration Appeal Tribunal Ex p. Khan [1983] Q.B. 790; Knights Motors Ltd v
Secretary of State for the Environment [1984] J.P.L. 584; R. v Mental Health Tribunal Ex p.
Pickering [1986]1 All E.R. 99; Bolton MBC [1995] 3 P.L.R. 37; MIT Securities Ltd v Secretary of
State for the Environment (1998) 75 P. & C.R. 188, CA; S v Special Educational Needs Tribunal
[1995] 1 W.L.R. 1627 at 1636; R. v Immigration Appeal Tribunal Ex p. Jebunisha Patel [1996] Imm.
A.r. 161 at 167; Arulandandam v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1996] Imm. A.R. 587
at 592; R. v Secretary of State for Education Ex p. G [1995] E.L.R. 58 at 67; R. v Lancashire CC Ex p.
Maycock (1995) 159 L.G. Rev. 201 ("standard letter" with individual variations sufficient in
circumstances); R. v Islington LBC Ex p. Hinds (1996) 28 H.L.R. 302; R. v criminal injuries
Compensation Board Ex P. Cook [1996] 1 W.L.R. 1037 at 1043; R. v Secretary of State for Transport
Ex p. Richmond-upon- Thames LBC [1996] 1 W.L.R. 1460, CA.)
9. (UCATT v Brain [1981] I.R.L.R. 224 at 228 (Lord Donaldson M.R.: reasons required of industrial
tribunal); Piggott Brothers & Co. Ltd v Jackson [1991] I.R.I.R. 309 at 313; Ex p. Ross, The Times,
June 9, 1994, CA (prison governor giving reasons for transfer of disruptive prisoner did not need to
give "Chapter and verse" of prisoner's conduct relied upon. See also R. (on the application of
Bahram) v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2003] EWHC 1453 at [8] (Maurice Kay J.: "what is
essential is not that an adjudicator should deal with every point at length, but that the determination
should be sufficiently reasoned to enable a claimant, his advisers, and any appellate or reviewing
body, to see why the claimant lost on a particular issue").
Provided the reasons satisfy these core criteria, they need not be lengthy10. Judicial review may be
inappropriate where the dispute relates to issues about the precise drafting of a decision11. Courts
should also not scrutinize reasons with the analytical rigour employed on statutes or trust
instruments12, and ought to forgive obvious mistakes that were unlikely to have misled anyone13.
Some general guidance on the standard of reasons required may also be derived from a
consideration of the purposes served by a duty to give reasons. Thus, reasons should be sufficiently
detailed as to make quite clear to the parties - and especially the losing party - why the
decision-maker decided as it did, and to avoid the impression that the decision was based upon
extraneous
10. (Stefan v General Medical Council [1999]1 W.L.R. 1293 at 1304 (reasons "need not be elaborate
nor lengthy")
11. (R. (on the application of W) v Acton Youth Court [2005] EWHC 954; (2006) 170 J.P.31)
12. (Seddon Properties Ltd v Secretary of State for the Environment (1978) 42 P. & C.R. 26; UCATT
v Brain [1981] I.R.L.R.224)
13.( Elmbridge BC v Secretary of State for the Environment (1980)39 P. & C.R.543 at 547-
548).
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
21

--- PAGE 22 ---

considerations, rather than the matters raised at the hearing14. Reasons must be sufficient to reveal
whether the tribunal made any error of law.15 Reasons must also enable the court to which an
appeal lies to discharge its appellate functions, and when this is limited to questions of law, it will
only be necessary to explain the exercise of discretion and to set out the evidence for the findings of
fact in enough detail to disclose that the decision- maker has not acted unreasonably16. The reasons
should refer to the main issues in the dispute, but need not necessarily deal with every material
consideration.17
14. (See, e.g. R. v Mental Health Review Tribunal Ex p. Clatworthy [1985] 3 All E.R. 699; R.(on the
application of Ashworth Hospital Authority) v Mental Health Review Tribunal for West Midlands
and North West Region [2001] EWHC Admin 901 at [77]; South Bucks DC v Porter (No.2) [2004]
UKHL 33; [2004] 1 W.L.R. 1953 at [36].)
15. (Ashworth Hospital [2001] EWHC Admin 901 at [77]; South Bucks [2004] UKHL 33; [2004] 1
W.L.R. 1953 at [36].)
16. (Varndelll v Kearney & Trecker Marwin Ltd [1983] I.C.R.683 at 693-694 , criticizing the possibly
more stringent test propounded in Alexander Machinery (Dudley) Ltd v Crabtree [1974] I.C.R. 120
at 122; cf. Thameside MBC v Secretary of State for the Environment [1984] J.P.L. 180, where the
court may have set a high standard to ensure that a peripheral consideration in the determination of
a planning appeal had not been given undue importance. And see R. v Chief Registrar of Friendly
Societies Ex p. New Cross Building Society [1984] Q.B. 227.)
17. (South Bucks [2004]UKHL 33; [2004] 1 W.L.R.1953 at [36]; R. v Criminal injuries
Compensation Board Ex p. Cook [1996] 1 W.L.R.1037 at 1043.) Brevity is an administrative virtue,
and elliptical reasons may be perfectly comprehensible when considered against the background of
the arguments at the hearing18. Some decisions (such as the refusal of planning permission by an
inspector) should be accompanied by reasons that are sufficiently precise to permit the individual to
make the modifications necessary to secure a favourable decision in the future, or (where a
Secretary of State disagree with an inspector) to enable an objector to know what, if any, impact the
planning considerations taken into account in a grant of planning permission may have in
18. (Elliot v Southwark LBC [1976] 1 W.L.R. 499; R. v Mental Health Tribunal Ex p. Pickering [1986]
1 All E.R. 99; Great Portland Estates Plc v Westminster City Council [1985] A.C.661 at 673. The
courts have recognised that the decision letters of inspectors are generally more succinct than the
report and recommendations by inspectors together with letter of decision from the Secretary of
State in non-devolved appeals. Nonetheless, in devolved decisions inspectors are held to much the
same standard; see Hope v Secretary of State for the Environment (1975) 31 P. & C.R.120; cf. Ellis v
Secretary of State for the Environment (1974) 31 p. & C.R. 130; and Hatfield Construction Ltd v
Secretary of State for the Environment [1983] J.P.L. 605. And see A. Barker and M. Couper, "The
Art of Quasi- judicial Administration: The Planning Appeal and Inquiry System in England" (1983)
6 Urban Law and Policy 363, pp. 454-455, where the increase in court challenges o inspectors'
decisions in the early 1980s is attributed to deficiencies in inspectors' skills in writing decision
letters.) relation to the determination of future applications19.
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
22

--- PAGE 23 ---

The standard of reasons required in certain specific contexts has been considered. For example, a
mental health review tribunal should explain why one witness is preferred to another; the reasons
should sufficiently inform the patient and the hospital of the findings of the tribunal; and the court
should take into account the fact that the tribunal has a legally qualified chairman and that reasons
do not have to be given immediately20. As for immigration adjudicators, it has been held that there
is no duty on the adjudicator to deal with every argument raised by the advocate in the case21, but
the critical matters must be explained sufficiently clearly for the "thought processes" of the
adjudicator on "material findings" to be understood.22
19. (Save Britain's Heritage v Number 1 Poultry Ltd [1991] 1 W.L.R. 153 at 167. A mental health
review tribunal should give sufficiently precise reasons to enable patients and medical advisors to
cover the matters on a renewed application)
20. (Ashworth Hospital [2001] EWHC Admin 901 at[77])
21. (Eagil Trust Co Ltd v Piggott-Brown [1985]3 All E.R. 119 at 122)
22. (English v Emery Reimbold and Strick Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 605; [2002] 1 W.L.R.2409 at [19]
(Lord Phillips M.R.).
However, whilst concern for the quality of administrative justice does not require that all tribunals
in all circumstances comply with some universally applicable standard, it is, nonetheless, essential
that the courts do not allow the duty to give reasons to atrophy. In principle a remedy ought to lie
for failure to give reasons23, unless the court is satisfied that no real prejudice has been caused to
the applicant.24 The reasons given by the reviewing court can often remedy the shortcomings of the
original decision maker.
23. (On an appeal from a decision on a question of law the courts may well have an inherent
jurisdiction to direct the minister or tribunal to give adequate reasons although no formal
application for mandamus has been made; see Iveagh (Earl) v Minister of Housing and Local
Government [1964] 1 Q.B. 395 at 410.)
24. (R. v Livepool CC Ex p. Livepool Taxi Fleet Operators' Association [1975] 1 W.L.R. 701 at 706; cf.
Preston BC v Secretary of State for the Environment [1978] J.P.L. 548 (omission of significant part
of reasoning normally prejudicial); Save Britain's Heritage [1991] 1 W.L.R.153. Outside the planning
field, however (where the requirement to demonstrate substantial prejudice is required by statute),
the courts will not readily conclude that an applicant is not prejudiced by an inadequately reasoned
decision. The test may be whether any other conclusion than that reached was realistically possible:
R. v Ministry of Defence Ex p. Murray [1998] C.O.D. 134, or whether it is "obvious" that there is no
injustice (R. v Winchester Crown Court Ex p. Morris [1996] C.O.D. 104) Whatever standards are
applied by judges to the adequacy of reasons given under a duty, it seems likely that reasons given
voluntarily - where there is no duty - will be reviewed in accordance with the same standards as are
applied to compulsory reasons25. It is no answer to an attack on the reasons for a decision on the
grounds that they disclose a failure to take into account a relevant consideration or that an
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
23

--- PAGE 24 ---

irrelevant consideration was taken into account or an error of law was made, that there is no
requirement to give reasons. The unlawfulness in such a case lies not in the failure to give proper
reasons, but in the unlawful nature of the decision, reasoning, or failure to reason, thereby
disclosed.26
25. (Elmbridge BC v Secretary of State for the Environment (1980) 39 P. & C.R. 543; Westminster
City Council v Secretary of State for the Environment [1984] J.P.L. 27 at 29- 30; also
Grenfell-Baines v Secretary of State for the Environment [1985] J.P.L. 256. cf. Kentucky Fried
Chicken Pty Ltd v Gantidis (1979) 140 C.L.R. 675. In R. v Secretary of State for Transport Ex p.
Richmond-upon-Thames LBC, the CA([1996] 1 W.L.R. 1460) did not rely upon the suggestion of
Jowitt J. at first instance ([1996] 1 W.L.R.1005) that there was no duty to give reasons in respect of a
voluntary consultation)
26. (See, e.g. R. v Criminal Injuries Compensation Board v Gambles [1994] P.I.Q.R. 314 (CICB's
reasons contained a defect such that the decision could not stand, in faling to establish or disclose a
rational and proportionate nexus between the conduct of the applicant and the decision not to offer
him even a discounted award). But see now R. v Criminal Injuries Compensation Board Ex p. Cook
[1996] 1 W.L.R.1037, CA) On applications for judicial review, it is the practice of government
departments and public bodies to explain their reasons for their actions irrespective of any legal
obligation to do so, where the outcome of the applications will depend on these reasons. As Lord
Donaldson M.R. has said, judicial review "is a process which falls to be considered with all the cards
face upwards on the table and the vast majority of the cards start in the authority's hands",27 But in
those cases where it is only because of the demands of procedural fairness or fairness that reasons
are given, it may be that a lower standard applied; reasons may be as brief as a few sentences if that
is enough to convey the substance of the decision28.
27. (R. v Lancashire CC Ex p. Huddleston [1986] 2 All E.R.941; OFT v IBA Healthcare [2004] I.C.R.
1364)
28. (R. v Civil Service Appeal Board Ex p. Cunningham [1991] 4 All E.R.310) In the light of the
above, in the opinion of this court, the impugned Order is not sustainable as it does not disclose the
reasons that weighed on the collective wisdom of the Council, in reversing concurrent findings of the
lower authorities. Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order is quashed in
so far as it affects the petitioner and the matter is remanded for a fresh consideration, by the MCI
and disposal in accordance with law. Having regard to the fact that the matter has been hanging fire
for several years now, it is requested that the MCI expedite further consideration and pass
appropriate orders in accordance with law and in any event, within a period of four months from the
date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Sd/-
JUDGE nv*
Dr Ramcharan Thiagarajan Facs vs Medical Council Of India on 3 April, 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10293098/
24