--- PAGE 1 ---

Girishchandra V. Bhatt & 2 Ors. vs Sterling Hospital on 19
March, 2018
          NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION  NEW DELHI          FIRST APPE
R/O. B-105, AKSHAR RESIDENCY, GIRIRAJ SOCIETY ROAD, SHAHID VIJAY MARG.  JUNAGADH.  GUJRA
R/O. B-105, AKSHAR RESIDENCY, GIRIRAJ SOCIETY ROAD, SHAHID VIJAY MARG.  JUNAGADH  GUJRAT
            BEFORE:      HON'BLE MR. DR. S.M. KANTIKAR,PRESIDING MEMBER 
      For the Appellant     :      Mr. Aditya Wadhwa, Advocate with
                                        Mr. Debopriyo Moulik, Advocate       For the Res
 Dated : 19 Mar 2018        ORDER           
1.       This appeal has been filed under Section 19(1)(a) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (for
short "the Act") against the order dated 28-07-2017 passed by the Gujarat State Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission (for short "the State Commission) in Complaint No.CC/15/76 wherein the
complaint was dismissed at admission stage.
2.       The complainants' (nos.1&2) son, Hitharth met with bike accident on   22-10-2013 at about
04:45 P.M., the truck run over Hitharth. Immediately he was admitted in Sterling Hospital (OP) at
Rajkot. He was normal on admission with the exception of fractures. He was fully conscious for first
two days without any major problems. All the reports were normal but thereafter his condition
worsened and on 25-10-2010, he expired during treatment. Since the death of Hitharth had taken
place solely due to negligence and carelessness in providing the treatment, the OP is solely
responsible for the death of Hitharth. Therfore, alleging case of medical negligence complaint was
filed before the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Gujarat (for short "the State
Commission").
3.       The OP filed a written version and denied all the allegations regarding negligence during the
treatment of Hitharth. The injured had suffered multiple bone fractures. The treatment was proper
with due care but the death was due to cardio respiratory arrest. The doctors at OP hospital tried
every effort to save the injured.
4.       On the basis of pleadings and arguments the State Commission dismissed the complaint at
admission stage under Section 12 (3) read with Section 18 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
Being aggrieved the complainant filed the instant appeal before this Commission.
5.       At the admission stage I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant, he submitted that
Mr. Hitharth suffered multiple fracture injury on 22-10-2013 at Rajkot and he was admitted to
Sterling Hospital for the treatment of simple fracture injuries. He was treated in ICU. For the first
two days his condition seemed normal, he was talking with relatives, all the vitals and reports
including CT scan was normal. However, from 24/25-10-2013 his condition started deteriorating.
The OP failed to provide proper treatment. The haemoglobin level of the patient was going down
which was not managed properly and further the lung infection was not controlled. Due to lethargic,
negligent and sub-standard treatment from the OP, Mr. Hitharth passed away. His Post-Mortem
Girishchandra V. Bhatt & 2 Ors. vs Sterling Hospital on 19 March, 2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183098680/
1

--- PAGE 2 ---

(PM) report was stage managed by the OP. It was stated that the cause of death as "cardio
respiratory failure due to poly trauma and its complications". It was a simple fracture which could
not resulted into the death of the patient. Therefore, it was negligence on the part of the OP.
6.       The counsel further submitted that the State Commission has totally ignored Expert opinion
and dismissed the complaint without giving any findings on the Expert opinion; thus, it was against
the law. He further submitted that there was no evidence to show the patient suffered DIC. The
D-Diamer test showed abnormality which was indicative of fibrin degradation products. Thus, there
were chances of clot formation and break down in the body. It was missed by OP. Even the OP did
not care for low level of haemoglobin, albumin, etc.. The OP did not perform investigation properly;
therefore, it was a deficiency and negligence during the treatment. The counsel further submitted
that dismissal of complaint at admission stage will cause severe injustice to the complainant. For
this submission he relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Dr. V. N.
Srikhande Vs. Anita Sena Fernandes, 2011(1) SCC 53. The Court in paragraph 17 of the judgment
held as below:
          "17.    We may hasten to add that the power conferred upon the Consumer
Forums under Sections 12(3), 18 or 22 to reject the complaint at the stage of
admission should not be exercised lightly because the Act has been enacted to
provide for better protection of the interest of consumers and the speedy and
inexpensive redressal mechanism enshrined therein is in addition to other remedies
which may be available to the consumer under the ordinary law of the land.
Therefore, admission of the complaint filed under the Act should be the rule and
dismissal thereof should be an exception. Of course, if the complaint is barred by
time, the Consumer Forum is bound to dismiss the same unless the consumer makes
out a case for condonation of delay under Section 24-A (2).
 
          The facts are different in the instant case because Dr. V. N. Srikhande's case was
on the point of limitation.  
7.       The counsel further submitted that the State Commission has not given any findings and
considered the Expert opinion to admit the complaint. The State Commission shall make reference
to the medical literature and expert evidence before deciding the case. In this context the counsel
relied upon one decision of this Commission in FA No.187 of 2001, P. Venkata Lakshmi Vs. Y.
Savitha Devi, II (2004) CPJ 14 (NC). The relevant paragraph of the judgment is reproduced as
below:
          "One of the major for our consideration brought by the learned counsel for the
appellant is that in order of the State Commission, while there is liberal reference to
the medical literature put forward by the respondents, there is no reference to the
medical literature produced by the complainant on each of the issue raised before us.
Our attention was drawn toward the voluminous medical literature presented before
Girishchandra V. Bhatt & 2 Ors. vs Sterling Hospital on 19 March, 2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183098680/
2

--- PAGE 3 ---

the State Commission by them, but not considered by the State Commission. Absence
of expert evidence has also been referred to as one of the grounds of 'no-proof' of
negligence. We have seen the material on record and find that while no expert
witness has been produced/examined by the appellant, we have to see this in 'ground
reality' terms, that very rarely, if ever, any other doctor comes forward to give
evidence in person or by way of evidence against other doctor. In this case this gap
was amply made good by producing literature on all the points at issue 'meconium'
foctal distress administration and complication of use of syntocinon, caesarean
section when to do in such cases, and on host of other points associated with the
decision making process on the issues included in the case. We see no reference to
any of the literature produced by the appellant, on which she relied upon to support
her complaint. We also see that there is no record on any cross-examination on
record which we are unable to appreciate. We see merit in the prayer made before us
by the learned counsel for the appellant that this case be remanded for rehearing and
also examination or obtaining the opinion of an expert in the subject considered
appropriate by the Commission."
 
          In my view the facts are different from the present case. In the instant case the complainant
had filed Expert opinion which was considered by the State Commission and thereafter the order
was passed.
8.       I have perused the impugned order of the State Commission, the relevant record from the OP
hospital. The main contention of counsel for the complainant is that Hitharth's death was not due to
injuries but he was died due to wrong treatment from the OP hospital. On admission to the hospital
the record shows he suffered multiple fractures. The report of CT scan of abdomen with pelvis done
on 23-10-2013 revealed following findings:
          "Fracture of bilateral iliac bone posteriorly, left sacral ala, anterior column of
right acetabulum, bilateral superior and inferior public rami and proximan sacral
segment (2) on left side.
          Fracture is also seen involving lower sacral segment on right side with displaced
fracture fragmen lies in presaeral region indenting posterior wall of rectum.
          Fracture is seen involving right transeverse process of L2 and L3 vertebra.
          No leak of contrast from distal colon is seen.
          No evident pneumoperitonium or significan peritoneal collection is seen except
thin stripe of fluid in right parahepatic region."
 
Girishchandra V. Bhatt & 2 Ors. vs Sterling Hospital on 19 March, 2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183098680/
3

--- PAGE 4 ---

9.       The x-rays showed that the patient had suffered fracture in the right Knee joint, bilateral
superior and inferior Pubic rami. Also there was a fracture involving bilateral iliac posteriorly and
left sacral ala, fracture of right lower margin of the sacrum with displaced fracture segment. The
x-ray of Lumbo Sacral spine revealed fracture of right transverse process of L2-L3 vertebrae. As per
USG abdomen and pelvis showed there was a clot and mild perivesical hematoma. Therefore, the
gravity of injuries can be ascertained on the day of admission i.e. 22-10-2013. Thus, the submission
of the appellants that only one fracture injury was there is unsustainable.
10.     The other laboratory reports like D-Diamer was 3 mcg/ml which is on higher side. Similarly,
the CPK levels are 4741 units/ltr (normal 55 to 170). It clearly indicates there was deterioration of
patient during course of treatment. On perusal of discharge summary it is clear that the patient was
initially investigated and treated with higher antibiotics, the CT scan and X-ray reports also showed
multiple fractures. I have perused the PM report also. The complainant alleged that there was a
mischief done by the doctor who performed PM and the departmental inquiry had been initiated
against him. In this context, I have perused the PM report. It showed haematoma in the chest wall
but the size, extent of haematoma was not explained by the doctor who performed the PM. He has
not mentioned correctly the fracture injuries on the body of the deceased. In my view there was no
fault in recording the PM findings. On admission the OP hospital conducted series of x rays,
pathology tests, sonography, CT scan of thorax and abdomen, LFT and immunoessays also. The
USG abdomen and pelvis revealed clot and mild haematoma. It is pertinent to note that due to
internal bleeding the OP managed the patient with transfusion by whole blood, blood components
like Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP), Red Blood Concentrate (RCC), Platelet Concentrate (PC), White
Blood Concentrate (WBC), Platelet Aphaeresis (SDP). Thus, in my view the OP hospital took
reasonable care, which was a standard of care during the emergency. During hospitalisation the
patient was administered higher antibiotics also but despite all efforts the patient's condition
deteriorated and there was bleeding. The CPK and D-Diamer abnormal values clearly indicative of
extensive muscle damage and DIC. Therefore, it was not the negligence on the part of the treating
doctor.
11.     I have perused the Expert opinion which was given by Dr. Nitin Shah, an experienced surgeon
qualified to be MS. On bare reading of entire Expert report in my view the Expert is trying to give his
suggestions to the State Commission i.e. adjudicating body that, "admit the matter". The relevant
text from the Expert opinion is reproduced as below:
          "I have been provided the medical file papers and consumer complaint copy
relating to the death of Late Heetarth Bhatt. I have gone through the entire file, the
consumer complaint and preliminary reply filed by the opponent. Based on this
opinion and upon relying on the documents on record, the Hon'ble Commission may
admit and eventually allow the complaint rightly filed for medical negligence of death
of Late Mr. Bhatt.
          The matter may be admitted and finally be allowed in favour of the
complainants due to the detailed opinion below. The Hon'ble Commission may
entertain and allow the matter to ascertain as to what went wrong and what were the
Girishchandra V. Bhatt & 2 Ors. vs Sterling Hospital on 19 March, 2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183098680/
4

--- PAGE 5 ---

lapses. It seems that the skilled people did not act as per accepted medical norms.
The skilled staff did not act promptly to handle such life threatening emergency
condition which developed post admission to the hospital of a young promising boy."
 
12.     The expert also opined that the patient was given platelets and two bottles of blood which
proves to be negligence on the part of the OPs. He also questioned about the mismatch blood
transfusion or very fast transfusion. I am rather surprised that how the expert arrived to the
conclusion of mismatching of the blood without any cogent evidence. The OP had transfused the
blood after knowing the deteriorating haemoglobin level and the bleeding also. Similarly, he has
commented on the infection as suspected hospital infection which is also a baseless submission. The
expert in paragraphs 15 and 16 mentioned as below:
          "15.    The complainants have complained that they were not kept in loop during
the treatment process. They were not allowed normal visiting hours in the ICU. This
directly goes against the hospital policy and rights of the patients as enumerated by
the opponent themselves.
          16.     It is also submitted by the complainants that the treating doctors in
addition to treating the ICU patients had large number of patients in the OPD
department. This shows that the treatment was done with negligence or minimal
involvement of the main doctors under whom they had been admitted."
13.     According to the hospital policy and international ICU norms the visitors are not allowed
randomly and the hospital shall prohibit multiple visitors to the ICU for protection of other patients
also. Thus, the above observation is ridiculous one.  
14.     The expert witness plays an essential role in determining medical negligence and the courts by
and large rely on expert witness testimony to establish the standards of care germane to a medical
negligence case. Generally, the purpose of expert witness is to describe standards of care relevant to
a given case, identify any breaches in those standards, and if so noted, render an opinion as to
whether those breaches are the most likely cause of injury. The expert witness is given more latitude.
The expert witness is allowed to compare the applicable standards of care with the facts of the case
and interpret whether the evidence indicates a deviation from the standards of care. The medical
expert also provides an opinion (within a reasonable degree of medical certainty) as to whether that
breach in care is the most likely cause of the patient's injury. The expert opinion will not carry any
value, if it is without the expert's explanation of the range of acceptable treatment modalities within
the standard of care and interpretation of medical facts.
In my view the expert opinion in the instant case has failed to explain the elements of medical
negligence. It is just a vague. It appears that, the expert is trying to favour the complainant and
repeatedly making recommendation to the State Commission "To admit the complaint and decide in
the interest of justice"; which is not a duty of an expert.
Girishchandra V. Bhatt & 2 Ors. vs Sterling Hospital on 19 March, 2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183098680/
5

--- PAGE 6 ---

Therefore, the expert opinion is not acceptable one as it has no evidentiary value. .
15.     Considering the sequence of events and on perusal of the medical record it is clear that the
deceased had suffered multiple fractures and was properly treated on emergency basis at OP
hospital. The discharge summary clearly shows the details. The active bleeding and haematoma was
treated by transfusion of blood and blood products as needed. The patient was monitored in the ICU
during hospitalisation but unfortunately suffered respiratory arrest. The doctors immediately
performed intubation and the patient was put on ventilator. The ionotropic drugs were also started
but later on the patient suffered cardiac arrest at 09:30 P.M. and CPR was given as per ACLS
protocol but the patient was dead by 10:16 P.M.     
16.     It is settled law that the onus to prove medical negligence lies largely on the complainant and
that this onus can be discharged by leading cogent evidence. A mere averment in a complaint by no
stretch of imagination, be said to be evidence by which the case of the complainant can be said to be
proved. It is the obligation of the complainant to provide the facta probanda as well as the facta
probantia. In my view the present the Consumer Complaint completely lacks facta probantia and
ought to be dismissed on that ground alone.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court   in Kusum Sharma Vs. Batra Hosptial and Medical Research Centre,
(2010) 3 SCC 480, has observed that "the normal human tendency is to pick fault whenever there is
a death in the family for which the doctor cannot be made a scapegoat. It is a matter of common
knowledge that after happening of some unfortunate event, there is a marked tendency to look for a
human factor to blame for an untoward event, a tendency which is closely linked with the desire to
punish. Things have gone wrong and, therefore, somebody must be found to answer for it. Filing
such complaints under the Consumer Protection Act against doctors on the rise and in many cases
these being frivolous, the Hon'ble Supreme Court said "Courts have to be extremely careful to
ensure that unnecessarily professionals are not harassed and (or else) they will not be able to carry
out their professional duties without fear".
 
17.     On the basis of foregoing discussion I do not find any illegality or perversity in the
well-reasoned order of the State Commission. Hence, the appeal is hereby dismissed in limine. 
  ...................... DR. S.M. KANTIKAR PRESIDING MEMBER
Girishchandra V. Bhatt & 2 Ors. vs Sterling Hospital on 19 March, 2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183098680/
6