Consumer Unity & Trust Society, Jaipur vs The Chairman &
Managing Director, Bank ... on 31 January, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 SCC (2) 150, JT 1995 (2) 51, AIRONLINE 1995 SC
622, (1995) 1 CPJ 1, (1995) 1 CPR 420, 1995 (1) KLT SN 43 (SC), (1995) 1 LS
17, (1995) 1 RAJ LW 103, (1995) 1 SCR 707 (SC), (1995) 1 SERVLR 698, (1995)
25 ALL LR 499, (1995) 2 CALLT 6, (1995) 2 CIVLJ 16, (1995) 2 JT 51 (SC), 1995
(2) SCC 150, (1995) 2 SCT 428, (1995) 83 COMCAS 187, (1995) BANKJ 754,
(1996) 1 SERVLJ 40, (1997) 2 COMLJ 192
Author: R.M. Sahai
Bench: R.M. Sahai, Kuldip Singh, S. Mohan
           PETITIONER:
CONSUMER UNITY & TRUST SOCIETY, JAIPUR
        Vs.
RESPONDENT:
THE CHAIRMAN & MANAGING DIRECTOR, BANK OF BARODA,  CALCUTTA,
DATE OF JUDGMENT31/01/1995
BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
KULDIP SINGH (J)
MOHAN, S. (J)
CITATION:
 1995 SCC  (2) 150        JT 1995 (2)    51
 1995 SCALE  (1)387
ACT:
HEADNOTE:
JUDGMENT:
Consumer Unity & Trust Society, Jaipur vs The Chairman & Managing Director, Bank ... on 31 January, 1995
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/902219/
1
1. The short question that arises for consideration in this appeal directed against judgment of
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi, is whether a banking company
which renders service within meaning of clause (g) of Section 2 of the Consumer Protection Act,
1986 (referred in brief as 'the Act') is liable to compensate its customers for loss of service due to
illegal strike by its employees.
2.Reasons for the strike due to enforcement of scheme of transfer by the Bank and its being illegal
due to employees resorting to it during pendency of conciliation proceedings before the Commission
have not been assailed in this appeal. Even the finding that the bank was prevented from rendering
any skeleton service to its customers due to unruly behaviour of the employees who not only created
barricades by forming human wall before the bank but even mutilated and defaced the signature on
cheques issued by the bank to cater to urgent demands of its customers by colluding with employees
of Reserve Bank of India is well founded and unassailable. But what was argued was that since the
customers of the bank were deprived of the services due to strike for 54 days, the bank was liable to
pay such amounts as, "(a) Interest on Over drafts accounts to be reimbursed at lending rate during
the period the account was not operative.
(b) Re-imbursement of interest at the lending rate less actual rate of interest creditable to the saving
deposit account holders.
(c) Interest at the lending rate on the ne- gotiable instruments held in suspense during this period to
be reimbursed to the customers.
(d) Re-imbursement of interest at which the customers may have borrowed money from elsewhere
to meet with their exigencies for the period during which they could not lay hands on their own
money lying stuck in or due to the Bank.
(e) Reimbursement of wharfage, demurrage and such other costs on consignments, documents of
which were lying in the Bank or could not be delivered to the Bank during this Period and the
related period before and after this strike.
(f) Such consequential damages and losses incurred by the customers resultant of the strike,
including compensation for mental and physical anguish and agony caused due to non- availability
of the money or against a limit/loan or over- draft facility with the Bank.
(g) Such other losses and claims, which may arise out of the actual claims to be lodged by the
customers and/or assessed for the strike period after making "thorough assessment through an
independent agency".
To determine merits of this submission, it is necessary to advert to certain provisions of the Act. A
consumer or any registered voluntary consumer association, like the appellant, is entitled to file a
complaint, as provided in sub-clause (iii) of Clause (c) of sub- section (1) of the Act for deficiency in
service. 'Service' has been defined in clause (o) of Section 2 of the Act and reads as under :-
Consumer Unity & Trust Society, Jaipur vs The Chairman & Managing Director, Bank ... on 31 January, 1995
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/902219/
2
""service" means service of any description which is made available to potential users
and includes the provision of facilities in connection with banking, financing,
insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, board or
loading or both housing construction entertainment, amusement or the purveying of
news or other information, but does not include the rendering of any service free of
charge or under a contract of personal service"
The expression, 'any description' widens the ambit of the Section and extends it to any service.
Therefore, payment of interest on overdrafts, interest at lending rate, wharfage, demurrage etc.
claimed by the appellant may be covered in the expression 'service'. But 'deficiency' in service has
been defined in clause (g) of Section 2 of the Act as under
"deficiency" means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality,
nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under
any law for the time being in force or has been undertaken to be performed by a
person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service"
Even though the depositors were deprived of the service of the bank but the deficiency did not arise
due to one of the reasons mentioned in clause (g). The shortcoming in the service by bank did not
arise due to failure on the part of bank in performing its duty or discharging its obligations as
required by law. Since the depositors were prevented to avail of the services of the bank not because
of any defi- ciency on the part of the bank but due to strike resorted to by the employees who almost
physically prevented the bank from functioning, the failure of the bank to render service could not
be held to give rise to claim for recovery of any amount under the Act. Further, the power and
jurisdiction of the Commission is to award compensation under Section 14(1)(d) of the Act as it has
been made applicable to to the Commission by sub-rule (b) of Rule 19 of the Rules framed under the
Act. Clause (d) of sub- section (1) of Section 14 is extracted below:
"to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer for
any loss or injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence of the opposite
party".
Each of these expressions used in the subsection are of wide connotation and are fully
comprehended both in common and legal sense. Negligence is absence of reasonable or prudent
care which a reasonable person is expected to observe in a given set of circumstances. But the
negligence for which a consumer can claim to be compensated under this sub-section must cause
some loss or injury to him. Loss is a generic term. It signifies some detriment or deprivation or
damage. Injury too means any damages or wrong. It means, 'invasion of any legally protected
interest of another'. Thus the provisions of Section 14(1)(d) are attracted if the person from whom
damages are claimed is found to have acted negligently and such negligence must result in some loss
to the person claiming damages. In other words, loss or injury, if any, must flow from negligence.
Mere loss or injury without negligence is not contemplated by this Sec- tion. The bank has not been
found to be negligent in discharge of its duties. Therefore, even if any loss or damage was caused to
any depositor but it was not caused due to negligence of bank then no claim of damages under the
Consumer Unity & Trust Society, Jaipur vs The Chairman & Managing Director, Bank ... on 31 January, 1995
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/902219/
3
Act was maintainable.
3. For these reasons, the appeal fails and is dismissed. But there shall be no order as to costs.
Consumer Unity & Trust Society, Jaipur vs The Chairman & Managing Director, Bank ... on 31 January, 1995
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/902219/
4