Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
                                            ADDITIONAL BENCH
 STATE CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION,
             PUNJAB, CHANDIGARH.
1)             First Appeal No.45 of 2019
                               Date of institution : 29.01.2019
                               Reserved on         : 09.05.2022
                               Date of decision : 25.05.2022
Dr. Amandeep Singh, Associate Professor, Unit IV, Department of
Medicines, Punjab Institute of Medical Sciences, Garha Road,
Jalandhar.
                                  .....Appellant/Opposite party No.2
                            Versus
1.   Gurdial Singh, aged 62 years, son of Sh. Lachmann Singh,
     resident of 309/14, Sawan Singh Colony, Near Markfed,
     Kapurthala.
                                 .....Respondent no.1/Complainant
2.   Punjab Institute of Medical Sciences, Garha Road, Jalandhar
     through its Managing Director.
3.   Smt. Sarabjit Kaur, Senior Staff Nurse, Punjab Institute of
     Medical Sciences, Garha Road, Jalandhar.
4.   PIMS Medical and Education Charitable Society, Garha Road,
     Jalandhar through its Chairman/President.
5.   Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. G.T. Road, Opposite Narinder
     Cinema, Jalandhar through its Branch Manager.
                                 .....Respondents /Opposite Parties
Present:-
    For the appellant            : Sh. Hardeep Singh, Adv. with
                                   Dr.Amandeep Singh,In person
     For respondent no.1         : Sh. D.R.Punia, Adv. with
                                   Sh.Gurdial Singh, In person
     For respondent no.2 & 4     : Sh. I. S.Bhatia, Advocate
     For respondent No.3         : Ex-parte
     For respondent No.5         : Sh. Krishna Kant, Adv. for
                                   Sh. J.P. Nahar, Advocate
                           AND
                                    2
FA No. 45 of 2019
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
1
2)                  First Appeal No.54 of 2019
                                  Date of institution :     07.02.2019
                                  Reserved on         :     09.05.2022
                                  Date of decision :        25.05.2022
1.     Punjab Institute of Medical Sciences, Garha Road, Jalandhar
through Sh. Amit Singh son of Sh. Harjit Singh, its Resident
Director/Authorized Signatory.
2.     PIMS Medical and Education Charitable Society (Regd.),
having its Administrative Office at Punjab Institute of Medical
Sciences, Garha Road, Jalandhar through Sh. Amit Singh son of Sh.
Harjit Singh, its Resident Director/Authorized Signatory.
                                            ....Appellants/OPs No.1 & 4
                                 Versus
1.      Sh. Gurdial Singh son of Sh. Lachmann Singh, resident of
        309/14, Sawan Singh Colony, Near Markfed, Kapurthala.
                                    .....Respondent No.1/Complainant
2.      Dr. Amandeep Singh, Professor, Department of Medicines,
        Kalpana Chawla Govt. Medical College & Hospital, Karnal
        (Haryana)
3.      Smt. Sarabjit Kaur, Senior Staff Nurse, Punjab Institute of
        Medical Sciences Garha Road, Jalandhar.
4.      Oriental Insurance Company Ltd., G.T.Road, Opp. Narinder
        Cinema, Jalandhar through its Branch Manager.
                                       .....Respondents/Opposite Parties
                              First Appeals against the similar
                              orders dated 07.01.2019 passed by
                              District    Consumer      Disputes
                              Redressal Forum (now Commission)
                              Jalandhar.
Quorum:-
      Mr. H.P.S.Mahal, Presiding Judicial Member
Mrs. Kiran Sibal, Member Present:-
    For the appellants              : Sh. I.S.Bhatia, Advocate
    For respondent No.1             : Sh. D.R.Punia, Adv. with
                                      Sh. Gurdial Singh, in person
       For respondent No.2          : Dr.Amandeep Singh,in person
       For respondent No.3          : Ex-parte
       For respondent No.4          : Sh. Krishna Kant, Adv. for
                                      Sh.J.P. Nahar, Advocate
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
2
KIRAN SIBAL, MEMBER
This order shall dispose of the above noted two First Appeals preferred against the same order dated
07.01.2019 passed by District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Jalandhar (now in short,
"the District Commission"), wherein the District Commission partly accepted the complaint of the
complainant and the following relief has been granted:
"19. In the light of above detailed discussion, the complaint of the complainant is
partly accepted and accordingly, OP No.1, 2 and 4, who are jointly and severally liable
for causing negligence with the wife of the complainant as well as harassment to the
complainant, mentally and physically, therefore, the aforesaid OPs are directed to
pay damages to the complainant, to the tune of Rs.8,00,000/- and further the
aforesaid OPs are directed to pay litigation expenses of Rs.10,000/-".
These both appeals bearing No.45 of 2019 and No.54 of 2019 have been filed by the appellants for
setting aside the impugned order of the District Commission. The facts are taken from First Appeal
No.45 of 2019 filed by the appellant/OP No.2 titled as "Dr. Amandeep Singh Vs. Gurdial Singh and
others".
2. It would be apposite to mention that hereinafter the parties will be referred, as have been arrayed
before the District Commission.
3. Brief facts of the case for disposal of the appeals are that the complainant got admitted his wife in
OP No.1 hospital on 08.02.2017, as she was suffering from some ailment. Seeing the seriousness of
the ailment, she was shifted to ICU at about 2:00 PM for want of Centre Line Fixation. At the time of
admission in the said hospital, it was brought to the notice of the complainant that as the veins of
his wife could not be traced out, the OPs were to install Centre lining in her body for the purpose of
her treatment. The OPs also assured the complainant that the centre lining is a safe process and the
same is one and only route of administration in dire emergency, when patient might go into COMA
and a result of such circumstances his wife would get the doses of medicines through that centre
lining and only after the installation of the same the treatment could have been possible and not
otherwise. The complainant immediately gave his consent for installation of centre lining in her
body and also purchased all the material required for the said process and handed over the same to
OPs No.2 and 3, who assured the complainant that they would initiate the centre line process on his
wife and treatment would be started immediately within no time of its installation. The complainant
was under the bonafide belief that the treatment had been initiated on his wife and OP No.2, when
contacted, every time assured that the treatment process had been started and condition of his wife
was stable and she was responding to the treatment. But on 09.02.2017, when the complainant got
to see his wife at about 01:00 PM, he was shocked to see that there was no centre line process on the
body of his wife. The complainant wanted to confirm the same from OP No.2, who started avoiding
him and kept on putting off the matter and assured that the treatment had been initiated upon his
wife. The complainant requested OPs No.2 and 3 to install the centre lining on his wife's body for
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
3
administration of the medicines in her body, but they did not bother and pay any heed to the
genuine request of the complainant for the reasons best known to them. It was further alleged that
after getting the requisite documents in his hand, the complainant came to know that the OPs gave
treatment for Type II Diabetic Mellitus, whereas the wife of the complainant was actually suffering
from Hypothyroidism and Hypertension, which was very much evident from Complicated Chronic
Disease Certificate bearing No.12176 dated 21.09.2015 issued by Guru Nanak Dev Hospital,
Amritsar. The wife of the complainant was never a patient of Diabetes and the OPs adopted and gave
different line of treatment, which was not required in her case, which also resulted in death of his
wife for which the OPs were wholly and solely responsible. It was further alleged that due to wrong
line treatment, no glucose was administered in the body of complainant's wife, due to which the
condition seemed to be deteriorating. It was pertinent to mention that immediately after admission
in ICU, an injection of Doparium was given to his wife to raise her Blood Pressure, despite the fact
that she was a declared case of Hypertension, which shows the negligence and wrong line of
treatment being given to his wife. Due to non-processing of the Center Line Process and due to non-
providing of necessary and requisite treatment, the wife of the complainant succumbed to her
ailment and she was declared dead on 10.02.2017 at 06:20 AM. The act and conduct of the OPs
amounts to negligence and deficiency in service. Hence, the complainant filed the consumer
complaint before the District Commission and sought Rs.18,00,000/- as compensation for causing
mental tension, harassment and for loss of life and company due to death of his wife and
Rs.33,000/- as litigation expenses.
4. The complaint was contested by the OPs. OPs No.1 to 4 appeared through counsel and filed joint
reply. They raised certain preliminary objections as stated in their reply, which are not required to
be reproduced here for the sake of brevity. On merits, OPs No.1 to 4 stated that they were rendering
the best of medical services in the field at their Super Specialty Hospital. Smt. Surinder Kaur, wife of
the complainant, was brought to the hospital in a very serious and critical condition. The patient was
having right sided pneumonia, portal vein thrombosis, sepsis acute liver and kidney injury. The
patient was admitted in the ICU because of her serious condition and not for the want of a central
line insertion. The veins of the patient could be traced out and intravenous cannula was inserted. At
the time of admission and even afterwards, the need for the central line insertion was not felt as the
veins were traced out and the medicines were being given to the patient intravenously. On the
repeated request of the complainant, the central line set was prescribed to the patient to be kept
ready. It was assured to the husband of the patient that if need be, central line would be inserted.
However, such need never arose, as the veins of the patient were traced out. Even if there would
have been any indication for the insertion of the central line, it would not have been possible to
insert the central line as the PT (INR) of the patient was 4.7%. This was a contra indication for the
insertion of central line. The prognosis of the patient had been intimated to the complainant right
from the time of admission, which is clear from the consent signed by the complainant/the husband
of the patient. The line of treatment given to the patient was ethical according to the disease pattern
and there was no negligence on the part of the OP No.2 and 3. Blood Pressure of the patient had
fallen during her stay in the hospital due to septicemia that the patient had, which is a known
complication in such disease and so ionotropes and vasopressors were started. The patient remained
admitted in ICU until her death. The patient succumbed to her multiple fatal diseases in a little time
over 35 hours after admission. The patient died on account of multiple, fatal, serious diseases which
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
4
she was suffering from at the time of admission and not on account of any negligence on the part of
the OP No.2, who is an expert doctor having sufficient experience. The history of the patient being
diabetic was given by her relative. No insulin was given to the patient and the patient was kept on
regular monitoring of the blood sugar. It was found during this monitoring that the blood sugar was
going low, so rather dextrose based fluids were given to the patient to raise the blood sugar. The
death of the patient was due to grave illness that the patient was suffering from as was evident from
the patient file and certified by more than two doctors independently, who have examined the
patient. The complaint was false and motivated and therefore, the same was liable to be dismissed.
After denying the other averments made in the complaint, OPs No. 1 to 4 prayed for dismissal of the
complaint.
5. OP No.5 filed its separate reply and contested the complaint by taking preliminary objections,
that there was no privity of contract between the complainant and OP No.5. The OP No.5/Oriental
Insurance Co. Ltd. was not necessary party in the present complaint and as such, the complaint was
liable to be dismissed on this short score alone. It was further alleged that without admitting any
liability, it was submitted that no copy of any Insurance Policy had been provided to OP No.5 for
having insured any other OP under the Professional Indemnity Policy. However, in case there was
any such policy then the same was between the insured and the insurer and subject to the terms and
conditions therein and no claim arisen within one year from the end of the respective policy period
and thus, the complaint was liable to be dismissed on this short score alone. It was further
submitted that no liability qua the answering respondent could be fixed in the complaint
proceedings. The matter inter-se the insured and the insurer was to be decided by the insurance
company by determining whether any claim was covered under the respective policy obtained by the
concerned doctor or hospital and thereafter, the liability of the insurance company, if any, was to be
determined by the competent authority of the company, as per the terms and conditions/exclusion
clauses of the policy. After denying the other averments made in the complaint, OP No.5 prayed for
dismissal of the complaint qua it.
6. The parties led their evidence in support of their respective contentions and the District
Commission after going through the record and hearing learned counsel for the parties, partly
allowed the complaint of the complainant, vide impugned order as above. Aggrieved with the same
appeals have been filed by the appellants.
7. Notice of the appeal was issued to the respondents through registered post. All the respondents,
except respondent No.3, appeared through counsel but respondent No.3 did not appear despite
service, therefore, she was proceeded against exparte vide order dated 02.05.2019.
8. We have heard the Ld.counsel for the appellant and respondents, except respondent No.3, and
have carefully gone through the written submissions filed by them and the record of the case.
9. Learned counsel for the appellant/OPs No.2, has vehemently contended on the similar lines as
pleaded in written reply filed before the District Commission. The learned counsel further
contended that the appellant specifically stated before the District Commission that if needed
central line would be inserted. It was never assured that centre line would definitely be inserted. It
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
5
was only for the safety that centre line was called for but at that time the same was not inserted as
the vein of the patient was traced out and intravenous cannula was inserted and the medicines were
given to the patient intravenously. It was only on the repeated request of respondent
No.1/complainant, the central line set was prescribed to the patient to keep it ready. Moreover, the
prognosis of his wife was intimated to him right from the time of admission, which can be barely
perused from the consent signed by him. The learned counsel further contended that on 08.02.2017
at the first moment i.e. at 1:50 PM Blood Sugar of the patient was checked and diabetes was found
163 mg/dl and further at 2:00 PM the same was 152 mg/ld, which shows that patient was suffering
from diabetes. Moreover, the diabetes count stated by the complainant in his complaint was of
Urine and as per medical rules and expert, the diabetes count for the Blood Sugar and Urine are
different. The learned counsel further contended that with regard to the Blood Pressure of the
patient is concerned, it had fallen during her stay in the hospital due to septicemia that the patient
had, which is a known complication in such disease and so ionotropes and vasopressors were
started. The patient succumbed to her multiple fatal diseases in a little time over 35 hours after
admission. The death of the patient was due to grave illness, which is evident from the patient file
and certified by more than two doctors independently, who have examined her. Alleging no
negligence and deficiency in service on the part of the appellant, the learned counsel for the
appellant prayed for acceptance of the appeal and setting aside of the impugned order.
10. Learned counsel for the respondents No.2 & 4/OPs No.1 & 4 (Appellants in FA No.54 of 2019)
has also vehemently contended on the similar lines as pleaded in written reply filed before the
District Commission. The learned counsel further submits that the impugned order passed by the
District Commission is wholly perverse, erroneous and not sustainable in the eyes of law. There is
no conclusive evidence on record that the wife of respondent No.1/complainant died on account of
any negligence and deficiency in service on the part of appellants. The observations made by the
District Commission are based on exemptions and presumptions. There is no opinion nor any report
of Medical Board, which was to be constituted by Civil Surgeon, Civil Hospital, Jalandhar regarding
the act and conduct of OP No.2 nor any medical expert has been examined by the complainant. The
Learned counsel further argued that the patient remained admitted in the said Hospital for barely
35 hours and was brought in a critical condition suffering from multiple fatal diseases. The patient
was provided the best possible medical care and remained admitted in Intensive Care Unit under
the supervision of expert Medical Practitioner and Para-medic Staff throughout her treatment. The
District Commission has wrongly discharged OP No.5, insurance company, from the liability of the
payment of compensation awarded to the complainant. Appellant/OP No.2 got himself insured from
OP No.5 for professional indemnity and the very purpose of the insurance was that in case any such
claim is awarded against OP No.2, the OP No.5 shall pay the same without questioning the merits of
such claim. The District Commission has wrongly held that the line of treatment given to the patient
was wrong. In fact, the line of treatment given to the patient was ethical according to her disease
pattern and there was no negligence on the part of the appellant/OPs. The learned counsel for the
respondents No.2 & 4/OPs No.1 & 4 prayed for acceptance of appeal and for setting aside of the
impugned order.
11. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent No.1/complainant, argued that the order
passed by the District Commission is a well reasoned order and had rightly awarded the
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
6
compensation on account of negligence and deficiency in service. The learned counsel argued on the
similar lines as mentioned in his complaint, which is not required to be reproduced here for the sake
of brevity. The Learned counsel prayed for dismissal of appeal.
12. The learned counsel for respondent/OP No.5, insurance company, argued that OP No.5 is only a
performa respondent in the present appeals, as no direction has been issued against it. Hence, the
learned counsel prayed for dismissal of the appeals qua insurance company/OP No.5
13. We have given thoughtful consideration to the contentions raised by appellant and the appearing
respondents.
14. The factual matrix of the case are that the respondent No.1/complainant got admitted his wife on
08.02.2017 in the hospital of appellant/OP No.1 for treatment of her ailment under the supervision
of appellant/OP No.2. The wife of the complainant was shifted to ICU of the said hospital on the
same day at about 02:00 pm due to her critical condition. Thereafter on 10.02.2017 at about
06.:20 am, she succumbed to her ailment and was declared dead. Respondent No.1/complainant
has alleged that due to non processing of central line process and due to adopting wrong line of
treatment by the appellants/OPs, his wife succumbed to her ailment. Hence, a consumer complaint
was filed by the complainant before the District Commission, which was partly accepted against the
OPs No.1,2 & 4, vide impugned order as above. Aggrieved by the said order of the District
Commission, two separate appeals have been preferred, one by appellant/OP No.2 i.e. FA No.45 of
2019 and another by appellants/OP No.1 & 4 i.e. FA No.54 of 2019 for setting aside the impugned
order.
15. The foremost grievance raised by the appellant/OP No.2 in the present appeal is that the District
Commission has failed to appreciate the fact that there is no deficiency in service or negligence on
the part of the appellant/OP No.2, who is a professional doctor working with the said hospital. In
reply to the allegations levelled by the respondent No.1/complainant that his wife succumbed to her
ailment due to non-fixation of Central line, the appellant/OP No.2 has vehemently contended and
pleaded that in the present case the need for fixation of Central Line did not arise as the veins of the
patient were traceable and medicines were given to the patient intravenously as well as orally.
Moreover, it would not have been possible to insert the central line as the PT(INR) report of the
patient was 4.7%, which was very high. On the other hand, the contention of respondent
No.1/complainant is that his wife was shifted to ICU on 08.07.2017 at about 2:00 pm for want of
centre line fixation and it was assured by OPs No.2 & 3 that they would initiate the centre line
process on the patient and treatment would be started immediately. But they failed to do so even
after the centre line kit was handed over to them.
16. Now, the foremost point for consideration before us is whether the District Commission has
rightly held the appellant negligent for not inserting the central line for administration of the
medicine to the patient or not? To determine this point, we have carefully perused the entire
evidence on record. From the perusal of In-Patient Record, Ex. OP-1, it shows that the wife of the
complainant was admitted at Punjab Institute of Medical Science, OP-1-hospital, on 08.02.2017 in a
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
7
critical condition, which can be assessed as under the heads Provisional Diagnosis and Final
Diagnosis, it is stated as under:-
"Provisional Diagnosis: Type-II DM, Hypothyroidism, UTI, LRTI, Septicemia,
ALI(Hepatitis), AKI(CAAKI), Hepatic Encephalopathy, CAD, Cholelithiasis, Morbid
obesity and Portal Vein Thrombosis.
Final Diagnosis: Type-II DM, Hypothyroidism, UTI, LRTI, Septicemia,
ALI(Hepatitis), AKI(CAAKI), Hepatic Encephalopathy, CAD, Cholelithiasis and
Morbid Obesity".
The history and diagnosis of the patient's illness clearly show that she was brought to the hospital in
a very serious and critical condition as she was already a patient of Type-II DM, Hypothyroidisum,
suffering from UTI infection, right side pneumonia, septicemia, acute liver and kidney injury, CAD,
Cholelithiasis and Morbid obesity. The doctor always takes the history of the patient from either the
patient or his relatives to arrive at the provisional and final diagnosis and accordingly begin with the
line of treatment. It is not the case of the respondent No.1/complainant that the OPs did not follow
the standard procedure that was required to be given to such a patient at the relevant time. The
patient was admitted in ICU because of the seriousness of the condition of the patient and not for
want of central line insertion. The appellant/OPs have placed on record Intake- output Chart, Ex.
OP-8. A perusal of the same shows that on 08.02.2017 fluids were given to the patient through
Intravenous Cannula inserted into her vein and total intake was 1200 ml and output of urine was
400 ml. Similarly, on 09.02.2017 fluids were given through vein as well as orally and it also shows
that there was total intake of 2000 ml and output of urine was 500 ml. Ex. OP-10 and OP- 11 are
Drug Administration Record, which show that doses of medicine were administrated frequently to
the patient through IV route on 08.02.2017, 09.02.2017 and even on 10.02.2017 i.e. on the date of
her death. The said documents placed on record by the appellant/OPs, corroborate his version that
the need for central line insertion was not felt as the veins were present and the medicines were
being given to the patient intravenously. Ex. OP-16 is Blood test report conducted by OPs Hospital,
which shows that PT (INR) of the patient was 4.7%. The said ratio was very high, which means that
the patient had an increased risk of bleeding as the blood was taking longer to clot. It also supports
the version of the appellant that due to higher ratio of PT (INR) of the patient, it was not possible to
insert the central line in her body. The contention of respondent No.1/complainant is that his wife
was admitted in the hospital on 08.02.2017 for want of centre line fixation and in support of his
contention he placed on record Ex.C-15 i.e. requisition slip wherein centre line kit was prescribed by
the treating doctor. A perusal of the said slip shows that the same was issued on 09.02.2017 i.e. after
the date of admission on 08.02.2017, which also proves the version of the appellant that the central
line set was prescribed to the patient to be kept ready and same would be inserted, if needed. But no
need arose as the veins of the patient were traced out. Accordingly, we find no force in the
contention of respondent No.1/complainant that OPs are negligent in not inserting the center line in
the body of his wife. Rather, we agree in the affirmative with the contention of learned counsel for
the appellant/OP No.2 that there was no need of center line insertion in the body of the patient as
the veins were traced out. The District Commission has wrongly held the OPs negligent for not
inserting the central line for administration of the medicine to the patient Surinder Kaur.
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
8
17. Another plea of the appellant is that the District Commission, while relying on the allegation
levelled by respondent No.1/complainant that the line of treatment given to the patient was wrong,
held the OPs negligent, whereas, the line of treatment given to the patient was ethical according to
her disease pattern and there was no negligence on the part of the appellant/OPs. On the other
hand, the contention of respondent No.1/complainant is that his wife was never a patient of Type-II
DM and the OPs adopted and gave different line of treatment, which was not required in her case. In
support of his contention respondent No.1/complainant placed on record Ex. C-8 i.e. Blood Test
report issued by 'Paramjit Clinical Laboratory & Microbiology Culture Lab', wherein Blood
Sugar(Fasting) of his wife was 84 mg/dl on 08.02.2017 i.e on the date of admission of patient in the
hospital of OP No.1. The complainant further placed on record Ex. C-23 i.e. Urine Analysis report
issued by 'FA Speciality Lab' on dated 18.01.2017, wherein Sugar level of patient Surinder Kaur was
mentioned as NIL. Similarly, in Chemical Examination report issued by 'Kripa Clinical Laboratory',
Ex. C-24, her urine analysis for Sugar was shown as NIL on 06.02.2017. On the other hand, the
appellant/OP No.2 relied on certain documents i.e In Patient Record, Ex. OP-1, wherein the wife of
the complainant was shown a patient of Type II DM under the heading of Provisional Diagnosis as
well as Final Diagnosis. It is a matter of fact that either the patient or his close relative would narrate
the history of patient to the doctor, on the basis of which, the doctor arrived at mentioning
provisional diagnosis as Type II DM. Ex. OP-2 i.e. Fatal Document-Check list also shows that patient
Surinder Kaur was Diagnosed for Type II DM as well as other multiple diseases i.e. Hypothyroidism,
UTI, LRTI, ALI(Hepatitis), AKI(CAAKI), Hepatic Encephalopathy, CAD, Gallbladder Stone, Morbid
obesity and the said check list was duly certified by the Consultant Doctor and Head of Department
of OP Hospital. Ex. OP- 3, is the Medical Certificate of cause of death, wherein the immediate cause
of death is Cardiopulmonary Arrest and Antecedent cause of death is stated to be Type II DM and
Hypothyroidism, AKI, ALI, CAD and Hepatic Encephalopathy. We have also perused Ex. OP-7 i.e.
Blood Sugar/Insulin Chart prepared by the Staff Member of OP Hospital, wherein blood sugar was
checked every 4 hours and the level of Sugar was observed as under:-
               Date       Time                RBS
               08.02.2017 1:50 pm             163 mg/dl
               08.02.2017 10:00 pm            108 mg/dl
                          02:00 am            152 mg/dl
               09.02.2017 06:00 am            73 mg/dl
                          10:00 am            76 mg/dl
                          02:00 pm            78 mg/dl
                          06:00 pm            41 mg/dl
               09.02.2017 07:00 pm            102 mg/dl
               09.02.2017 11:00 pm            67 mg/dl
               09.02.2017 03:00 am            126 mg/dl
               10.02.2017 06:00 am            253 mg/dl
From the perusal of above said chart, we observe that the blood sugar level of patient Surinder Kaur
was frequently going up and down during the period of stay of the patient in the OP No.1 Hospital.
On the date of admission 08.02.2017, the Blood Sugar level was '163 mg/dl' and on 09.02.2017, it
was around normal range but on 10.02.2017 it again went upto '253 mg/dl'. Accordingly, from the
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
9
above said documents relied upon by the appellant/OP No.2, we are of the view that the patient was
suffering from Type II DM as is also evident from the blood sugar/insulin chart( Ex.OP-7) prepared
by the OP Hospital. Hence, there is force in the contention of appellant/OP No.2 that the patient
was diabetic and the treatment given to the patient was ethical as per the standard medical protocol
and according to her disease pattern. The District Commission has wrongly relied on the version of
the respondent No.1/complainant that wife of the complainant was never a patient of Diabetes and
the OPs adopted and gave different line treatment, which was not required in her case.
18. As far as the contention of learned counsel for the appellant/OP No.2 that despite best efforts to
cure the patient, she died due to her grave illness and not by negligence on the part of the appellant
is concerned, it has been proved on record that the wife of the complainant, namely; Surinder Kaur
was brought to the hospital in a very serious and critical condition. At the time of admission, she
was suffering from various fatal diseases as is evident from Admission Request Form Ex. OP-21 and
Ex.OP-1 and OP-2, as discussed above. Further the progress note Ex. OP-24, also shows that the
patient was diagnosed with Type II DM, Hypothyroidism, UTI, LRTI, Septicemia, ALI(Hepatitis),
AKI (CAAKI), Hepatic Encephalopathy, CAD and Cholelithiasis and was shifted to ICU due to her
critical condition. Even, the blood test reports, Ex. OP-12 to OP-19, produced by the appellant/OPs
prove that patient was suffering from multiple fatal diseases. The blood pressure of the patient had
fallen during her stay in the hospital due to Septicemia that the patient had, which is a known
complication in such cases and so ionotropes and vasopressors were started to raise the blood
pressure. The prognosis of the patient had been intimated to respondent No.1/complainant right
from the time of admission, which is clear from the Informed Consent for Admission form, Ex.
OP-22, duly signed by him as the patient was brought to hospital in a critical state. By signing the
said consent letter the respondent No.1/complainant gave his consent to the terms of the said letter.
The patient died on account of multiple, fatal, serious diseases , which she was suffering from at the
time of admission and not on account of any negligence on the part of the appellant/OP No.2, who is
an expert doctor having sufficient experience. Hence, we are of the opinion that there is force in the
contention of appellant/OP No.2 that despite best efforts, the wife of complainant died due to her
grave illness and there was no deficiency/negligence on the part of the appellant/OP No.2.
19. Another ground of appeal raised by the appellant/OP No.2 is that the District Commission has
based its observation on assumption and presumption. It has been submitted that neither any
expert opinion nor any report of medical board, which was to be constituted by Civil Surgeon, Civil
Hospital, Jalandhar regarding the act and conduct of appellant/OP No.2, has been examined. In this
regard, we are of the view that since the allegation of the respondent No.1/complainant is of medical
negligence on the part of OPs, especially in a case where the patient was brought in a critical
condition in the hospital, the ends of justice would have squarely been met and a medical board or
opinion of medical expert would have clinched the controversy had the District Commission
summoned for the same. Although it is not imperative to constitute a medical board but sometimes,
the report of an expert would have thrown some light on the issue whether standard medical
protocol has been followed or not. The District Commission has also not gone into the depth of the
evidence so adduced before it and simply held the Doctor to be negligent on account of two
allegations i.e. non fixation of central line and wrong line treatment as alleged by the respondent
No.1/complainant. Therefore, we support in affirmative with the contention of the appellant/OP
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
10
No.2 that the evidence or medical report is not read into properly by the District Commission.
20. We are fortified with the Judgment passed by the Hon'ble National Commission in the case
tilted as V.P. Singh Vs. Dr. M.P. Chandrakar & others(NCDRC) 2016(3) C.P.R. 23, wherein it has
held that:-
"Consumer Protection Act, 1986 Section 21 Revision Petition- Medical Negligence -
Proof - On the basis of laboratory reports, medical records, and the medical board's
opinion, it is found that, patient was suffering from advanced liver cirrhosis, and he
was in liver failure, thus it was a fatal condition - There is nothing on record to prove
that doctor made a very unpleasant remark and advised for liver transplant - OP
Hospital treated the patient as per standard of practice - No deviation found from the
duty of care - No cure is no negligence - Hospital treated the patient of liver failure
with the best possible available mode - No lapses or shortcomings found in the
treatment given by OP - Appeal dismissed".
In an another judgment titled as Dr. K.K. Sharma Vs. Fortis Hospital (NCDRC) 2010(1) C.P.J. 271,
the Hon'ble National Commission has held as under:-
"Consumer Protection Act, 1986 Sections 2(1)(g) and 19 Appeal - Medical negligence
- Proof - Injuries due to accident - Medical record shows that Patient at the time of
admission into Hospital was in a coma, was in a case of progressive worsening of the
sensorium on account of head injury and infection, fractured in both bones in the left
leg, was hypertensive, diabetic, had bronchial asthma and bed sores on the left thigh
and back - He was a high risk Patient considering his age of 86 years and being in
condition stated, at the time of admission into Hospital - No material on record to
establish that treatment given to Patient was against norms of normal standard
medic al parlance - No evidence on record to establish that the Appellant Hospital/
doctors/ staff have been negligent in the treatment of the patient - All efforts were
made in accordance with standards of normal medical parlance - No medical
negligence can be attributed to Respondents- Appeal dismissed".
Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment titled as Kusum Sharma & others Vs. Batra
Hospital & Medical Research Centre & others (JT 2010 (2) SC 7), while dealing with the cases of
negligence, examined various pronouncements and while deciding whether the medical profession
is guilty of medical negligence held that following well known principles must be kept in view:-
"I. Negligence is the breach of a duty exercised by omission to do something which a
reasonable man, guided by those considerations which ordinarily regulate the
conduct of human affairs, would do, or doing something which a prudent and
reasonable man would not do.
II. Negligence is an essential ingredient of the offence. The negligence to be
established by the prosecution must be culpable or gross and not the negligence
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
11
merely based upon an error of judgment.
III. The medical professional is expected to bring a reasonable degree of skill and
knowledge and must exercise a reasonable degree of care. Neither the very highest
nor a very low degree of care and competence judged in the light of the particular
circumstances of each case is what the law requires.
IV. A medical professional would be liable only where his conduct fell below that of
the standards of a reasonably competent practitioner in his field.
V. In the realm of diagnosis and treatment there is scope for genuine difference of
opinion and one professional doctor is clearly not negligent merely because his
conclusion differs from that of other professional doctor. VI. The medical
professional is often called upon to adopt a procedure which involves higher element
of risk, but which he honestly believes as providing greater chances of success for the
patient rather than a procedure involving lesser risk but higher chances of failure.
Just because a professional looking to the gravity of illness has taken higher element
of risk redeem the patient out of his/her suffering which did not yield the desired
result may not amount to negligence.
VII. Negligence cannot be attributed to a doctor so long as he performs his duties
with reasonable skill and competence. Merely because the doctor chooses one course
of action in preference to the other one available, he would not be liable if the course
of action chosen by him was acceptable to the medical profession. VIII. It would not
be conducive to the efficiency of the medical profession if no Doctor could administer
medicine without a halter round his neck.
IX. It is our bounden duty and obligation of the Civil society to ensure that the
medical professionals are not unnecessary harassed or humiliated so that they can
perform their professional duties without fear and apprehension.
X. The medical practitioners at times also have to be saved from such a class of
complainants who use criminal process as a tool for pressurizing the medical
professionals/hospitals particularly private hospitals or clinics for extracting uncalled
for compensation. Such malicious proceedings deserve to be discarded against the
medical practitioners.
XI. The medical professionals are entitled to get protection so long as they perform
their duties with reasonable skill and competence and in the interest of the patients.
The interest and welfare of the patients have to be paramount for the medical
professionals.
21. Sequel to our above discussion and in view of ratio of above referred judgments, we come to the
conclusion that the wife of the complainant was a high risk patient considering her age of 61 years
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
12
and being in condition as stated, at the time of admission into the hospital. There is no material on
record to establish that treatment given to patient was against norms of normal standard medical
protocol. Therefore, we are of the considered view that the negligence cannot be attributed to
appellant/OP No.2 so long as he performed his duties with reasonable skill and competence and has
given treatment as per norms. Accordingly, we allow the appeal of the appellant/OP No.2 and the
impugned order of the District Commission is hereby set aside.
22. The appellant had deposited a sum of Rs.25,000/- at the time of filing of the appeal. This
amount alongwith interest, which has accrued thereon, if any, shall be remitted by the registry by
way of crossed cheque/DD to the appellant/OP No.2 after the expiry of limitation period in
accordance with law.
23. In view of the reasons and discussion held in First Appeal No.45 of 2019 titled as "Dr. Amandeep
Singh Vs. Gurdial Singh & others", this appeal No.54 of 2019 titled as 'Punjab Institute of Medical
Science & another Vs. Gurdial Singh and other', is also allowed and the impugned order qua
appellants is also set aside as there was no negligence or deficiency in service on the part of the
appellants/OP No.1 & 4.
24. The appellants had deposited a sum of Rs.25,000/- at the time of filing of the appeal. They
further deposited an amount of Rs.5,60,000/- in compliance with the order dated18.02.2019. These
amount alongwith interest, which has accrued thereon, if any, shall be remitted by the registry by
way of crossed cheque/DD to the appellants/OP No.1 & 4 after the expiry of limitation period in
accordance with law.
25. The appeals could not be decided within the stipulated period due to heavy pendency of Court
cases and non-sitting of this Commission due to pandemic of Covid-19.
(H.P.S. Mahal) PRESIDING JUDICIAL MEMBER (KIRAN SIBAL) MEMBER May 25th, 2022 (dv)
Dr. Amandeep Singh vs Gurdial Singh & Ors on 25 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103027091/
13