Gurmel Singh vs Branch Manager, National Insurance Co. ... on
20 May, 2022
Author: M.R. Shah
Bench: B.V. Nagarathna, M.R. Shah
                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4071 OF 2022
         Gurmel Singh                                                …Appellant(s)
                                                 Versus
         Branch Manager, National Insurance Co. Ltd. …Respondent(s)
                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned final judgment and order dated 03.08.2021
passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission at New Delhi in Revision Petition
No. 2898/2015, by which, the appellant is denied the relief of settling the claim under Reason:
herein has preferred the present appeal.
2. That the appellant herein – original complainant was the registered owner of the Truck bearing
No. CG−04−JC−4984. The said vehicle was insured with the respondent herein – insurance
company for the period from 22.08.2012 to 21.08.2013. The appellant also paid a sum of Rs.
28,880/− to the respondent towards premium. On 23−24.03.2013 in the midnight, the said vehicle
was stolen. A FIR was immediately lodged in the Police Station Kumhari, which was registered as
FIR No. 57/13. On the same day, the complainant also informed the insurance company as well as
the Regional Transport Office (RTO) regarding the theft of the Truck. That after giving information
regarding theft, the appellant submitted all the documents sought by the insurance company, but
the insurance company failed to settle the claim. That being aggrieved by the delay in settling the
claim, the appellant filed the consumer complaint No. 200/2013 before the District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission, Durg, Chhattisgarh. The District Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission disposed of the said complaint vide order dated 03.12.2013 with the direction that the
appellant herein would furnish duplicate certified copy of the certificate of registration of Truck to
Gurmel Singh vs Branch Manager, National Insurance Co. ... on 20 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36262873/
1
the insurance company within a month and that the insurance company within a month after
receiving the same would settle the claim as per the terms and conditions of the insurance policy. It
is the case on behalf of the appellant that in compliance of the order passed by the District
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, the appellant submitted an application before the RTO
for obtaining duplicate certified copy of the certificate of registration of the Truck in question.
However, RTO denied to issue duplicate certified copy of the certificate of registration on the ground
that due to the report of the theft of the Truck, the details regarding registration certificate on the
computer has been locked. Therefore, the RTO refused to issue the duplicate certified copy of the
certificate of registration of the Truck. Thereafter, the appellant – original complainant submitted
an application before the insurance company along with photocopy of the certificate of registration
and registration particulars, as provided by the RTO. Despite the above, the claim was not settled
and therefore, the appellant filed a fresh consumer complaint bearing No. 179/2014 before the
District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Durg, Chhattisgarh. That the said District
Commission vide order dated 23.01.2015 dismissed the said complaint by observing that as the
appellant had not filed the relevant documents for settlement of claim therefore, the non−
settlement of the claim cannot be said to be deficiency in service. The order passed by the District
Commission has been confirmed by the State Commission and thereafter, by the National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission by the impugned judgment and order.
3. We have heard Shri Anand Shankar Jha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and
Mrs. Hetu Arora Sethi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent – insurance company.
4. It is not in dispute that the vehicle belonging to the appellant was insured with the respondent –
insurance company. It is also not in dispute that the same was valid for the period between
22.08.2012 to 21.08.2013. It is also not in dispute that the appellant herein paid a sum of Rs.
28,880/− to the respondent towards premium. It is also not in dispute that the insured vehicle was
stolen for which a FIR has been registered in the Police Station Kumhari on the very day on which
the vehicle was stolen. Immediately on the very same day, the appellant informed the insurance
company as well as RTO regarding the theft of the Truck. The appellant also produced the
photocopy of the certificate of registration and the registration particulars as provided by the RTO.
However, the appellant could not produce either the original certificate of registration or the
duplicate certified copy of certificate of registration of the Truck. When the appellant applied for the
duplicate certified copy of the certificate of registration, the RTO denied to issue the duplicate
certified copy on the ground that in view of information/report regarding theft of the vehicle, which
has been registered with the RTO, the details regarding registration certificate on the computer has
been locked. The insurance claim has not been settled mainly on the ground that the appellant has
not produced either the original certificate of registration or even the duplicate certified copy of
certificate of registration issued by the RTO. However, the appellant did produce photocopy of
certificate of registration and other registration particulars as provided by the RTO. Even, at the
time of taking the insurance policy and getting the insurance, the insurance company must have
received the copy of the certificate of registration. Therefore, the appellant had tried his best to get
the duplicate certified copy of certificate of registration of the Truck. However, because of the report
of theft of the Truck, the details of registration on the computer have been locked and the RTO has
refused to issue the duplicate certified copy of registration. Therefore, in the facts and circumstance
Gurmel Singh vs Branch Manager, National Insurance Co. ... on 20 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36262873/
2
of the case, when the appellant had produced the photocopy of certificate of registration and the
registration particulars as provided by the RTO, solely on the ground that the original certificate of
registration (which has been stolen) is not produced, non− settlement of claim can be said to be
deficiency in service. Therefore, the appellant has been wrongly denied the insurance claim.
4.1 In the present case, the insurance company has become too technical while settling the claim and
has acted arbitrarily. The appellant has been asked to furnish the documents which were beyond the
control of the appellant to procure and furnish. Once, there was a valid insurance on payment of
huge sum by way of premium and the Truck was stolen, the insurance company ought not to have
become too technical and ought not to have refused to settle the claim on non−submission of the
duplicate certified copy of certificate of registration, which the appellant could not produce due to
the circumstances beyond his control. In many cases, it is found that the insurance companies are
refusing the claim on flimsy grounds and/or technical grounds. While settling the claims, the
insurance company should not be too technical and ask for the documents, which the insured is not
in a position to produce due to circumstances beyond his control.
5. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the order passed by the District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission, Durg, Chhattisgarh, dismissing the complaint filed by the
appellant and the orders passed by the State Commission and National Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission, confirming the same deserve to be set aside and are hereby set aside. The
original complaint being Consumer Complaint No. 179/2014 filed before the District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission, Durg, Chhattisgarh, is hereby allowed. The appellant is entitled to
the insurance amount of Rs. 12 lakhs along with interest @ 7 per cent from the date of submitting
the claim. The respondent – insurance company is also saddled with the liability to pay the litigation
cost, which is quantified at Rs. 25,000/− to be paid to the appellant herein. The aforesaid amount is
to be paid by the insurance company to the appellant within a period of four weeks from today. The
present appeal is accordingly allowed.
                                     ………………………………….J.
                                     [M.R. SHAH]
NEW DELHI;                           ………………………………….J.
May 20, 2022                         [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
Gurmel Singh vs Branch Manager, National Insurance Co. ... on 20 May, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36262873/
3