Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16
March, 2009
 NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION NEW DELHI
 NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES
REDRESSAL COMMISSION    NEW DELHI  
  
 REVISION PETITION NO.
992 OF 2005 
(From
the Order dated 23.12.2004 in Appeal No. 12 of 2004 of M.P. State Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission,   Bhopal) 
   
 MADHYA
PRADESH HOUSING BOARD  PETITIONER 
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
1
  
VERSUS 
 RAJESH MANDIOI   RESPONDENT 
  
WITH
  
 REVISION PETITION NO.
993 OF 2005 
(From
the Order dated 23.12.2004 in Appeal No. 279 of 2004 of M.P. State Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission,   Bhopal) 
   
 MADHYA
PRADESH HOUSING BOARD  PETITIONER 
  
VERSUS 
 S.D. GU PTA  RESPONDENT 
  
  
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
2
WITH
  
 REVISION PETITION NO.
994 OF 2005 
(From
the Order dated 23.12.2004 in Appeal No. 2198 of 2003 of M.P. State Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission,   Bhopal) 
   
 MADHYA
PRADESH HOUSING BOARD  PETITIONER 
  
VERSUS 
 AJAYSINGH BAGHEL  RESPONDENT 
  
  
 BEFORE: - 
 HONBLE
MR.  JUSTICE
ASHOK BHAN, PRESIDENT 
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
3
  HONBLE MR. B.K. TAIMNI, MEMBER 
   
 FOR THE
PETITIONER : MR. D.K. SINGH, ADVOCATE. 
FOR RESPONDENT 
IN R.P. NO. 992/2005 :
IN-PERSON. 
  
FOR RESPONDENT IN 
R.P. NO. 993 & 994/2005: NEMO 
  
 PRONOUNCED ON :
16.03.2009 
   
 O R D E R 
 
ASHOK BHAN J., PRESIDENT   Madhya Pradesh Housing Board-petitioner herein, which was the
Opposite Party before the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, Bhopal (hereinafter
referred to as the District Forum for short) has filed the present Revision Petition.
 
This Order shall dispose of the above noted three Revision Petitions.
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
4
 
By the impugned Order, the State Commission has disposed of a number of Appeals filed by the
petitioner-Housing Board but since we are concerned with only three Revision Petitions, we shall be
referring to the facts giving rise to these Revision Petitions only.
 
Shortly stated, the facts of the case are: -
 
In pursuance to the advertisement issued by the petitioner, Shri Rajesh Mandioi, Shri
S.D. Gupta and Ajay Singh, respondents in these Revision Petitions, filed applications
for purchase of Junior HIG House in Sector-C, Ayodhya Nagar, Bhopal under Self
Financing Scheme. The scheme provided that the purchaser would be required to get
the sale deed registered of the plot only and not that of the super structure. The
common grievance of these complainants was regarding sub-standard and defective
construction of the houses by the petitioner-Housing Board and further deficiency of
the Housing Board in the matter of delay in construction and delivery of houses
which made these complainants to get the registered sale deed executed for the super
structure as well and pay stamp duty and registration fee. Apparently, earlier under
some notification of the State Government, execution of the sale deed and
registration thereof in respect of super structure of the houses allotted under the self
financing scheme was exempted. According to the complainant, by the time the
delivery of houses was made to them, the said notification was withdrawn as a result
of which they were required to pay the registration fee and the stamp duty on the
land value of the plot as well as the super structure constructed thereon. The District
Forum allowed the complaint and awarded a compensation of Rs.25,000/- to each of
the complainants.
 
Aggrieved against the Order passed by the District Forum, the petitioners as well as
the Housing Board filed Appeals before the M.P. State Consumer Disputes Redressal
Forum, Bhopal (hereinafter referred to as the State Commission for short). By the
impugned Order, the State Commission has reduced the compensation for the
sub-standard and defective construction of houses to Rs.20,000/-. Further, it was
held that it was not a case of unfair trade practice but of late construction and
delivery of houses, which deprived the respondent allottees of the benefit of
exemption granted earlier by the State Government. Accordingly, it was held that
ends of justice would be served by requiring the petitioner-Housing Board to pay to
the respondent/complainants, the amount required to be spent by them in purchase
of stamp paper and the registration fee.
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
5
 
These Revision Petitions came up for hearing before a Bench presided over by
Honble Mr. Justice M.B. Shah, as he then was, on 13.05.2005. The following Order
reads as under:-
 
Considering the reasons recorded in para 5 of the Order of the State Commission, in
our view, the Impugned Order passed by the State Commission does not call for any
interference. If officers of the Housing Board are inefficient or concerned engineers
have committed mistakes in supervising the work, it would be open to the Housing
Board to recover the amount awarded by the District Forum/State Commission from
the concerned officers. This would be in conformity with the laid down by the apex
court in M.K. Gupta Vs. Lucknow Development Authority (1994) Vol.I SCC 243.
Impugned Order does not call for any interference.
However, with regard to the registration charges and stamp duty only, issue notice to
the respondent returnable on 17.8.2005.
   
In view of the above Order, the Revision Petition is confined only to the question of
registration charges and stamp duty only. It is not in dispute before us that, as per the
advertisement dated 31.01.1999, the respondents were required to pay registration
fee and stamp duty on the value of the plot only and not that of the super structure
constructed on the plot. Counsel for the petitioner contends that the State
Government has erred in holding that the notification withdrawing the exemption for
chargeability of the super structure on the plot was issued subsequent to the issuance
of the advertisement. He has drawn our attention to the notification dated
22.06.1998, which reads as under: -
 
No.B-4-17-94-C.T.-5(22)-In exercise of powers conferred by clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of Section 9 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (No.II of 1899) and in supersession of
this Department Notification No.2851-B-6-17-C.T.-V-87, dated the 30th May, 1992,
the State Government hereby reduces/remits the rates of stamp duty chargeable on
the instruments of sale executed by Madhya Pradesh Housing Board, Vikas
Pradhikaran, Primary Co-operative Housing societies and Madhya Pradesh
Co-operative Housing Federation Ltd., in relation to the houses/departments
constructed under Self Financing Scheme, subject to the following conditions,
namely:-
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
6
 
(a)                           The chargable stamp duty shall be exepted/reduced to the extent of
100 percent, 50 percent and 25 percent for the categories of houses/departments of
Economically Weaker Section, Low Income Group and Middle Income Group
respectively. No exemption/reduction shall be granted to cases of High Income
Group Houses/apartments.
(b)                           This exemption/reduction shall be limited only to original allottees under the Self
Financing Scheme.
(c)                            For the purpose of clause (a), except the Primary Co-operative Housing Societies a
necessary certificate shall be given by the said executing institutions, and in relation to the Primary
Co-operative Housing Societies an affidavit shall be given by the concerning Co-operative Society.
 
ExplanationFor the purpose of this notification, the words Houses/apartments of economically
weaker sections, Low Income Group and Middle Income Group mean such houses/apartments
whose maximum plinth area and plot area shall not exceed     Category of housing Maximum Plinth
Maximum Area (sq.M.) plot area (sq.M.) (1) (2) (3) Economically Weaker 30 60 Sections   Low
Income Group 48 96   Middle Income Group 85 199   By order and in the name of the Governor of
Madhya Pradesh K.P. S ETHIA, Addl. Secy.
(Emphasis supplied) It may be noted that this notification was issued prior to the issuance of the
advertisement by the petitioner dated 31.01.1999. By this notification, the State Government has
reduced the stamp duty chargeable on the instrument of sale deed executed by the Madhya Pradesh
Housing Board, Vikas Pradhikaran, Primary Co-operative Housing Societies and Madhya Pradesh
Co-operative Housing Federation Ltd. in relation to the houses/apartments constructed under self
financing scheme. It exempted/reduced the stamp duty to the extent of 100 percent, 50 percent and
25 percent for the categories of houses/apartments of Economically Weaker Sections, Low Income
Group and Middle Income Group, respectively. It further provided that no exemption/reduction
shall be provided to High Income Group Houses/apartments. The respondents have purchased
Junior High Income Group houses on which no exemption was available. No doubt, in the
advertisement, the petitioner-Housing Board had given to the prospective buyers an assurance that
they would be required to pay registration fee and stamp duty on the purchase of value of the plot
only and not of the super structure built on the plot. The question that arise is whether it would
operate as an estoppel against the petitioner from charging registration fee and stamp duty as
provided under the Stamp Act, 1899. The Board could not have extended any promise/assurance
contrary to the provisions of the statute or the statutory notification issued by the State
Government. Any advertisement issued in violation of the provisions of the statute/notification,
would be void ab initio and would not bind the Board. Some of the purchasers of the High Income
Group plots had challenged the vires of the notification issued by the State Government
withdrawing the exemption from payment of registration fee and stamp duty charges on High
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
7
Income Group houses by filing Writ Petition No. 5025 of 2002 in the High Court of Judicature at
Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh) (hereinafter referred to as the High Court for short). Single Judge of the
High Court dismissed the aforesaid Writ Petition which has attained finality. In the aforesaid case,
the Counsel for the petitioner contended that: -
 
Possession of the houses were obtained on the understanding that they have to pay
the stamp duty only on the value of the plot and not on the value of construction.
Board is relying on the notification (P.1) to realize the stamp duty on the value of plot
and also on the value of construction. The action is illegal and arbitrary, respondents
are bound by promissory estoppel and cannot realize stamp duty on the cost of
construction.
 
Repelling the following contention of the petitioner, it was held: -
The Board could not have extended any promise contrary to the provisions of statute
or statutory notification issued by the State Govt. time to time as the Board has no
such authority to grant exemption from stamp duty. Any assurance made in scheme
(P.4) issued on 28.7.99, no such promise or assurance could have been given as
Board had no authority, it cannot be said to be binding as to the stamp duty, from
time to time, fixed and realized under the orders of State Government, thus, doctrine
of promissory estoppel is not at all attracted as person in authority has not made any
promise, the Board has no authority to make any assurance with respect to payment
of stamp duty. Consequently, it cannot be said that Housing Board was bound by the
assurance made in circular (P.4), whatever stamp duty is payable, is according to
notification (P.1) dt.22.6.98, the date of execution of sale deed is material, stamp duty
has to be paid with reference to the date of execution of sale deed.
(Emphasis supplied)   A perusal of the said paragraph would show that the High
Court has held that the Board was not bound by the assurance given contrary to the
notification dated 22.06.1998 withdrawing the exemption to pay the requisite
registration charges on the High Income Group houses. The impugned Order passed
by the State Commission runs counter to the observations made by the High Court in
the aforesaid Writ Petition. We respectfully agree with the view taken by the High
Court in the aforesaid case.
 
Accordingly, we set aside the Order of the State Commission to the extent it directs
the petitioner to pay the amount required by the complainants to be spent on
purchase of stamps, execution of sale deeds and registration thereof in respect of
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
8
super structure. The amount spent on execution and registration of lease deed of the
plot area shall have to be borne by the purchaser-complainants.
 
The Revision Petitions are disposed of in the above terms. Parties to bear their own
costs.
 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(ASHOK BHAN J.) PRESIDENT   .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(B.K. TAIMNI) MEMBER   REVISION PETITION NO.
992-994 OF 2005 (From the Order dated 23.12.2004 in Appeal No. 12 of 2004 of
M.P. State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Bhopal)   MADHYA
PRADESH HOUSING BOARD PETITIONER   VERSUS RAJESH MANDIOI & ORS.
RESPONDENT     Draft Order in the above matter is sent herewith for your kind
perusal. If approved, the same may be listed for pronouncement.
 
(ASHOK BHAN J.) President 12.03.2009   Honble Mr. B.K. Taimni, Member                
               
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board vs Rajesh Mandioi on 16 March, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/193311244/
9