National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Mrs.Maya Gandhi on 22 January,
2007
 NCDRC
NATIONAL CONSUMER
DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION   NEW DELHI 
  
 REVISION PETITION
NO. 2235 OF 1999 
(From the order dated 5.10.1999 passed in Appeal No.2106
of 1999 of the State Commission, Uttar Pradesh)
  
National Insurance Co. Ltd.  
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Mrs.Maya Gandhi on 22 January, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1259866/
1
   Jeevan
  Bharti  Building
  Connaught Circus
   New
  Delhi.  Petitioner 
  
 Versus
 Mrs.Maya Gandhi
W/o Shri Prem Lal Gandhi 
Nai Basti, Satipur 
  Philibhit
  Bye Pass Road 
   Bareilly (U.P.)  Respondent 
 BEFORE : 
 HONBLE MR. JUSTICE
M.B. SHAH, PRESIDENT 
 MRS.
RAJYALAKSHMI RAO, MEMBER 
  
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Mrs.Maya Gandhi on 22 January, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1259866/
2
For the Petitioner :  Mr.Sunil Kapoor, Advocate 
  
For the Respondent : Mr.R.C.
Mishra, Advocate 
   
   
 Dated the 22nd day of
January, 2007 
  
 O R D E R 
   
M.B. SHAH, J., PRESIDENT   .I. Exercise of jurisdiction under Section 27 of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986:
 
Before dealing with the matter on merits, we would caution the Fora constituted
under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, all over the country, that powers vested in
the Consumer Fora under Section 27 of the Consumer Protection Act 1986 are to be
exercised cautiously and are not to be misused or used in arbitrary manner. The
equitable jurisdiction conferred on the Consumer Fora is to be exercised in just and
equitable manner.
 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Mrs.Maya Gandhi on 22 January, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1259866/
3
In this case, it is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that for
extraneous reasons, against the Chairman-cum- Managing Director of the National
Insurance Company Ltd. non-bailable warrants were issued by the District Forum
despite the fact that the District Forum was informed that the insurance company has
preferred an Appeal against the order passed by it. Further, the warrants were issued
even though the District Forum had attached the account of the insurance company
with the Punjab National Bank, Bareilly, on 13.12.1999.
Surprisingly, the District Forum has also observed that for recalling the warrants, an
undertaking should be given by the Divisional Manager of the insurance company to
the effect that no Appeal would be filed or if filed, the same would not be pressed.
 
On the basis of the said threat, the Divisional Manager of the insurance company
wrote that the insurance company has deposited the amount with the learned forum
and that after recall of the warrant issued under Section 27 of the Consumer
Protection Act against all officers of the company, no further Appeal would be filed in
any higher forum and if filed, shall not be pressed by the insurance company.
 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the complainant submitted that the
insurance company has stated so on its own. In our view, this is unbelievable and the
learned counsel ought not to have believed the same.
 
In our view, the Consumer Fora, all over the country, should take care and caution
before issuing such warrants or summons.
This power is vested in the Consumer Fora for rendering justice and not for
harassing.
 
No doubt, the Consumer Fora is required to exercise equitable jurisdiction so that
harassed consumers do not suffer. But, that would not empower the Consumer Fora
to exercise jurisdiction under Section 27 of the Act in any arbitrary and unjustified
manner.
 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Mrs.Maya Gandhi on 22 January, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1259866/
4
In our view, the order of issuance of warrants by the Consumer Fora against the
judgment and taking of an undertaking from the officers of the Insurance Company
that appeal would not be filed against the order passed by the District Forum was
totally arbitrary, unjustified and de-hors judicial norms. District Forum ought to have
considered that filing of appeal by the aggrieved party is statutory right. That right
cannot be curtailed. Secondly, Section 15 of the Act itself provides how the consumer
is to be protected in case an appeal is filed. Hence, we strongly condemn the act of the
District Forum in issuing warrants against the Chairman of the National Insurance
Company Ltd. and also taking of an undertaking from its officers not to file appeal
against its order.
 
.II. On merits:
On merits, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the insurance company submitted
that as per the Claim Form tendered by the complainant, it is clear that the vehicle
was not used but was kept standing at the premises of the complainant since 1990
and she has mentioned the same at four places in the Claim Form. He, therefore,
submitted that for a vehicle, which was not in use for more than four years, there is
no question of theft being committed. He further submitted that there were arrears of
Road-tax and Passenger-tax and Fitness Certificate was also not in existence at the
relevant time. It is also pointed out that the State Bank of India had financed the
vehicle and the dues were not paid by the complainant. The preliminary Police
Investigation also reveals that there was no theft as per the Final Report submitted
before the Magistrate. He, therefore, submitted that on the face of it, the complaint
was bogus and, therefore, the District Forum as well as the State Commission
committed error in passing the impugned order.
 
He further contended that the State Bank of India had financed the loan, but, as the
complainant was not in a position to pay the said amount, the story of theft is
concocted. He further pointed out that after receiving the information of the alleged
theft, the insurance company has given investigation to the International Security
Detective Services, Lucknow, who reported that the vehicle was not stolen. The police
also found that the vehicle was not stolen and a lot of amount was due in the form of
taxes etc. Therefore, the complainant has concocted a false story. Thereafter, police
report was presented before the Court on 2.3.1994. On the objection raised by the
complainant, the court referred it for second investigation. Learned counsel for the
insurance company submitted that this was not justifiable. It is his contention that in
any count there is no reason to doubt the Claim Form submitted by the complainant
wherein at four places she has stated that the vehicle was not in use.
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Mrs.Maya Gandhi on 22 January, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1259866/
5
 
As against this, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the complainant
submitted that there is nothing to disbelieve the version of the Complainants. The
officers of the insurance company visited the place, saw the vehicle and thereafter the
Insurance Cover was given. He further contended that if the officers of the Insurance
Company commit any fraud, they should be prosecuted, but, without any basis, the
complainant should not be penalized. It is his contention that the Claim Form was
filled in by the agent of the Insurance Company and the complainant, who is a
woman, has merely signed the same in Hindi, without knowing what was being
written. He further submitted that the insurance company had appointed a surveyor
and the surveyor assessed the loss but the same is not produced on record.
Therefore, there was no alternative for the District Forum but to pass an order on the
basis of the sum assured.
 
In our view, it is quite possible that something wrong has been done by the insurance
agent or the officers of the insurance company, but we cannot help in such a
situation. It is for the insurance company to take appropriate action against the
concerned defaulting officers.
 
In Survey Report it is specifically mentioned that the vehicle was a 1986 model,
transferred in the name of the complainant in December 1990 and was hypothecated
with the State Bank of India with effect from 5.5.1986. The Road Tax was paid on
30.6.1993 with effect from 1.4.1993. Passenger Tax was not paid. In the column
meant for Fitness Particulars, it is mentioned that the validity was up to 19.6.1990.
 
The vehicle was stolen in the night of 3rd/ 4th March, 1994, for which first
information report was lodged with the Police Station. Information was also given to
the Insurance Company, on 4th March. 1994. The Insurance Company rejected the
claim on the ground that the vehicle at the time of the theft did not have a fitness
certificate.
 
Further, the documents produced on record do justify the contention that the vehicle
was stationary or that there was no fitness certificate. Annexure R-3 collectively
produced on record mentions that the fitness certificate was to expire on 5th March,
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Mrs.Maya Gandhi on 22 January, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1259866/
6
1994. The application for temporary permit was granted to the Complainant on 6th
March, 1993.
 
In view of the survey report as well as the documents which are produced on record
the repudiation by the Insurance Company cannot be justified.
 
Hence, it is directed that on the basis of the loss assessed by the surveyor the
Insurance Company is required to reimburse the amount of Rs.2,23,500/- and the
orders passed by the District Forum and the State Commission directing the
Insurance Company to pay the sum of Rs.3,50,000/- requires to be modified.
Ordered accordingly.
 
Further, it is to be stated that the Insurance Company was compelled to deposit a
sum of Rs.5,79,016/- on the basis of the order passed by the District Forum. The said
amount was deposited in December, 1999, which is withdrawn by the Complainant.
In this view of the matter, the Complainant is directed to refund the excess amount
recovered within a period of eight weeks from today, with interest at the rate of 12%
p.a.   The Revision Petition is disposed of accordingly. There shall be no order as to
costs.
Once again we would reiterate that the Consumer Fora all over the country should
take care and caution before issuing summons or warrants under Section 27 of the
Act. The power is to be exercised for doing justice and not for harassment.
 
Sd/-.J. ( M.B. SHAH) PRESIDENT     Sd/-
(RAJYALAKSHMI RAO) MEMBER     s.h.rao    
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Mrs.Maya Gandhi on 22 January, 2007
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1259866/
7