United India Ins.Co.Ltd. vs Saroj Kumar Panda on 20 August,
2009
 NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION
NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES
  REDRESSAL COMMISSION
NEW DELHI
   REVISION PETITION NO. 565 OF
   2006
(Against the order
  dated 14.12.2005
United India Ins.Co.Ltd. vs Saroj Kumar Panda on 20 August, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163656198/
1
in Appeal No.543/1998
      of
  the State Commission, 
Orissa) 
THE DIVISIONAL MANAGER 
UNITED INDIA INSURANCE CO.LTD. 
THROUGH ITS DEPUTY MANAGER 
8TH FLOOR, KANCHENJUNGA BUILDING, BARAKHAMBA
  ROAD, 
NEW DELHI-110001 
  
........ Petitioner
Vs.
United India Ins.Co.Ltd. vs Saroj Kumar Panda on 20 August, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163656198/
2
  
SAROJ KUMAR PANDA 
P.O. ARUNODAYA MARKET, 
P.S. MADHUPATNA, 
CUTTACK, ORISSA 
........ Respondent
 BEFORE: 
  
                  HON'BLE
  MR. JUSTICE B.N.P.SINGH, PRESIDING MEMBER 
    HON'BLE MR. S.K. NAIK, MEMBER 
  
United India Ins.Co.Ltd. vs Saroj Kumar Panda on 20 August, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163656198/
3
For the Petitioner
                  : Mr.
  A.K. Raina, Advocate 
For the
  Respondent             : Mr.
  Ashok Panigrahi, Advocate
  with
 Mr.
  S.S.Dash, Advocate 
   Pronounced on :_20.08.2009 
 ORDER
 
PER S.K. NAIK, MEMBER     This revision petition has been filed by the Divisional Manager, Untied
India Insurance Co. Ltd. who was the opposite party before the District Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission, Cuttack (for short District Forum) whose order dated 19.5.1998 directing
him to settle the claim of the respondent/complainant as per the assessment made by the surveyor
with 18% interest p.a. and to pay him a sum of Rs.5000/- as compensation and Rs.1000/- as cost of
litigation which has been affirmed by the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission Orissa,
Cuttack (for short State Commission) in its order dated 14.12.2005.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the Ambassador Car of the respondent/complainant
while carrying eight passengers and being driven by one Shri Tutu Jena during the currency of the
insurance policy, met with an accident on 4.6.1994. The vehicle suffered heavy damage apart from
injuries to the passengers and an FIR was lodged at Sadar Police Station, Dhenkanal.
United India Ins.Co.Ltd. vs Saroj Kumar Panda on 20 August, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163656198/
4
The complainant incurred an expenditure of Rs.70,118.44 towards the repair of the vehicle. He,
therefore filed a claim with the petitioner/opposite party insurance company for its reimbursement.
A surveyor who had been appointed soon after the accident vide his report dated 15.11.1994 assessed
the loss at Rs.35,000/-. However, even this amount was not admitted and the claim on the whole
was repudiated on the ground that the complainant has committed breach of the policy conditions
inasmuch as the driver was not authorized to drive a Public Service Vehicle/Transport Vehicle such
as Taxi and was not having a valid and proper driving licence at the time of the alleged accident. It
was also carrying eight passengers as against the permitted capacity of six.
It was in this background that a complaint came to be filed before the District Forum, who as
already stated partly allowed the complaint and directed the opposite parties to honour the
reimbursement of the loss as assessed by their surveyor. When this order was challenged by the
petitioner/opposite party before the State Commission, it did not find any justification to interfere
with the order passed by the District Forum and dismissed the appeal.
Aggrieved thereupon, the petitioner/opposite party has filed this revision petition.
The arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner are only a reiteration of the stand taken
before the State Commission. While admitting that the vehicle met with an accident during the
subsistence of the period of insurance and further that the incident was reported to the Police and
an FIR has been lodged and further that they appointed a surveyor who assessed the loss to the
vehicle at Rs.35,000/- ; it has been contended that the claim was repudiated since the insured had
committed breach of the policy conditions. In that the driver was not authorized to drive a Public
Service Vehicle and was not having a valid and proper driving licence at the time of the accident.
Further, he was carrying eight passengers as against the permitted capacity of six. There was also a
breach of the Motor Vehicle Rules as the driver was not wearing the uniform and PSB badge as
prescribed under the Rules. Referring to Section 3 of the Motor Vehicle Act, learned counsel submits
that it is mandatory for a person to obtain an endorsement on the licence if he was to drive a
Transport Vehicle in any public place. In this case, he contends that the driver did not have any
endorsement on his licence authorizing him to drive a Public Service Vehicle/Transport Vehicle and
thus there was a clear breach of the provision of the Motor Vehicle Act and the policy conditions. In
this regard, he has relied upon the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in the case of United
India Insurance Co.Ltd. Vs. Gian Chand reported in JT 1997 (7) SC 736 and National Insurance
Co.Ltd. Vs. Kusum Bai & Ors. reported in 2006 ACJ 1336. He has, therefore, contended that both
the fora below have failed to consider this proposition of law in its proper perspective and their
orders cannot be legally sustained.
Learned counsel for the respondent/complainant on the other hand, has rebutted the contentions of
the learned counsel for the petitioner stating firstly that as per clarification given by the Licensing
Authority vide their letter dated 24.4.1995, the driver Tutu Jena was authorized to drive both Light
Motor Vehicle and Heavy Goods Vehicle w.e.f. 26.5.1993 which was subsequently renewed upto
20.5.1996. On the day of the accident i.e. on 7.6.1994, the driver, Tutu Jena, therefore possessed a
valid and effective licence to drive Heavy Goods Vehicles. Transport Vehicle besides other categories
means a Goods Carriage and Public Service Vehicle as defined in Section 2 (47) of the Motor Vehicle
United India Ins.Co.Ltd. vs Saroj Kumar Panda on 20 August, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163656198/
5
Act and when the Licensing Authority has authorized the driver to drive a heavy goods vehicle, the
District Forum has rightly held that the driver is deemed to have been authorized to drive a Goods
Carriage and a Public Service Vehicle.
Contending that reliance placed on the orders of the Honble Supreme Court by learned counsel for
the petitioner are clearly distinguishable on the facts of the case, the counsel submitted that they
would not support the case of the petitioner.
Referring to the carrying of eight passengers against the permitted capacity of six, the counsel
submits that in view of the decision of the Honble Supreme Court in the case reported in 1996 (4)
SCC 647 and IC (1995) CPJ 28 SC, this minor deviation cannot be treated to be a breach of the
condition of insurance policy and the insurance company cannot absolve itself from its liability. In
so far as the driver not being in the prescribed uniform or not wearing the badge is concerned, the
counsel submits that this cannot be said to be a fundamental breach of the policy condition and in
any case cannot be said to have contributed to the cause of the accident. It is too petty and technical
an objection to absolve the insurer from its liability to pay compensation to the insured. Thus,
justifying the order passed by the fora below, the learned counsel has prayed that the revision
petition be dismissed.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
Learned counsel for the petitioner - insurance company finds fault with the impugned order mainly
on three counts ; first and primary objection is that the driver of the vehicle Tutu Jena did not
possess a proper and valid driving licence and, therefore, he was not authorized to drive a Public
Service Vehicle/Transport Vehicle like Taxi. The second flaw pointed out relates to the vehicle
carrying eight passengers as against the authorized six and thirdly, that he was not wearing the
Public Service Badge (PSB).
On the first point as to whether Tutu Jena was having an effective and valid licence ; it is not
disputed that the Licensing Authority, Cuttack in his letter addressed to the Administration Officer
of the petitioner insurance company dated 24.4.1995 had clarified that the said Tutu Jena was
authorized to drive both Light Motor vehicle and Heavy Goods Vehicle. The validity of the said
authorization was upto 20.5.1996. There being no dispute with regard to the period of validity, we
have to consider whether the endorsement of Light Motor Vehicle and Heavy Goods Vehicle on his
driving licence fulfilled the requirement of the provision of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988. Section 2
(47) defines Transport Vehicle as under :-
Transport Vehicle means a Public Service Vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational
institution bus or a private service vehicle.
Further, Section 2 (35) of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines Public Service Vehicle
as under :-
United India Ins.Co.Ltd. vs Saroj Kumar Panda on 20 August, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163656198/
6
Public Service Vehicle means any motor vehicle used or adapted to be used for the
carriage of passengers for hire or reward and include a maxicab, a motorcab, contract
carriage, and stage carriage.
Since the driver of the vehicle Tutu Jena possessed a driving licence which as clarified
by the Licensing Authority, Cuttack and also as per the endorsement on his driving
licence authorized him to drive Heavy Goods Vehicle which is a category even higher
than a Goods Carriage as defined under the head of Transport Vehicle, it cannot be
said that he was not authorized to drive a Public Service Vehicle. It has to be held that
the Licensing Authority has authorized him to drive a Goods Carriage and Public
Service Vehicle. Since, the policy was for passenger carrying vehicle which can only
mean Public Service Vehicle the objection raised by learned counsel for the
petitioner, in our view cannot be sustained. Reference to the judgment of the Honble
Supreme Court in the case of United India Insurance Co.Ltd. Vs. Gian Chand
reported in JT 1997 (7) SC 736 and National Insurance Co.Ltd. Vs. Kusum Bai & Ors.
reported in 2006 ACJ 1336 (supra) are therefore, not applicable.
In so far as the objection of carrying of eight passengers against authorized six is
concerned, the same cannot be termed to be a flagrant violation of the condition of
the insurance policy. Learned counsel for the respondent complainant has rightly
placed reliance in the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court in the case of
B.V.Nagaraju Vs. Oriental Insurance Co. reported in 1996 (4) SCC 647 and IC (1995)
CPJ 28 SC in which the Honble Apex Court has ruled that carrying of persons more
than the number permitted in terms of the policy cannot be said to be a fundamental
breach so as to deny indemnification.
With regard to the allegations that the driver was neither wearing uniform prescribed for the drivers
nor the Public Service Badge (PSB), the said omissions cannot be attributed to be of such a nature as
to absolve the petitioners of the liability to indemnify the damage to the vehicle ; since the driver
would be liable for explanation for the lapse separately.
In any event, it cannot be said that these lapses contributed to the cause of accident.
We are, therefore of the view that the revision petition being devoid of any merit deserves to be
dismissed and we order accordingly with a cost of Rs.3000/- to be paid by the petitioner to the
respondent.
 
Sd/ (B.N.P. SINGH) PRESIDING MEMBER     Sd/ (S.K. NAIK) MEMBER St/1  
United India Ins.Co.Ltd. vs Saroj Kumar Panda on 20 August, 2009
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163656198/
7