Vinit Bahri vs M/S Mgf Developers Ltd on 4 February, 2026
Author: Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench: Prashant Kumar Mishra
2026 INSC 114                                                                       REPO
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.6588 OF 2023
               VINIT BAHRI AND ANOTHER                                       …. APPELLAN
                                                           VERSUS
               M/S MGF DEVELOPERS LTD.                                       …. RESPONDE
               AND ANOTHER
                                                     JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
1) This Appeal assails the impugned judgment dated 11.05.2023 in Consumer Complaint
No.74/2017, passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission1 at New Delhi
whereby, the NCDRC dismissed the consumer complaint preferred by the appellants. FACTUAL
MATRIX
2) Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts stand thus: the appellants filed a complaint before the
NCDRC for seeking a direction to the respondents to pay (i) Rs. 1,59,89,994/- being 18% interest;
(ii) Rs.50,00,000/- as compensation for mental agony and harassment;
(iii) Rs.15,00,000/- as compensation due to the change in location of Tower- C; (iv) Rs.35,61,494/-
as excess amount realized towards fixtures and fitting; (v) Rs.2,50,000/- as the litigation costs; and
(vi) any other relief which is deemed fit and proper.
NISHA KHULBEY Date: 2026.02.04 17:06:20 IST Reason:
1 For short, ‘the NCDRC’
3) The backdrop of the above complaint is that the respondents launched a group
housing project in the name of ‘The Villas’ at Village Sahraul, Sector-25, Gurgaon, in
Vinit Bahri vs M/S Mgf Developers Ltd on 4 February, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126128049/
1
the year 2005. The appellants in March 2005, deposited Rs.15,00,000/- as the
booking amount, and, on 02.09.2005, they were allotted Unit No.VP-C/802 located
on the ground floor of Tower-C with super built area of 3590 square feet.
4) Thereafter, on 12.06.2006, a Flat Buyer’s Agreement was executed in favour of the appellants and
Clause 9.1 of the Agreement stipulates that the possession of the flat shall be handed over within 36
months from the date of the Agreement, subject to a grace period of 90 days for obtaining the
occupation certificate. It is the appellants’ case that the due date of possession expired on
11.09.2009 and that the respondents have unilaterally changed the layout plan of Tower-C without
informing the buyers. The respondents in their meeting held on 23.04.2009 have admitted the
factum of change in the layout plan of Tower-C. The appellants also alleged that, on 06.09.2009, the
respondents raised a demand for Rs.10,82,000/- and, subsequently, on multiple occasions, the
respondents demanded for payments and the appellants have obliged to the same under protest and
have taken possession of the flat on 08.01.2015. The respondents vide letter dated 02.01.2015,
invited objections against the change of layout plan and the appellants filed their objections against
the same. However, Director, Town and Country Planning, Haryana, issued occupation certificate
on 14.08.2015.
5) On 10.01.2017, the appellants filed the subject complaint alleging deficiency in service and unfair
trade practice. The appellants challenged the demand of Rs.30,81,894/- under various heads of
EEDC, IDC, Service Tax, etc. and also Rs.4,80,000/- towards deficiency in providing promised
fixtures in the flat.
6) Before the NCDRC, respondent No.1 filed a written reply wherein it was stated that the appellants
have already been paid/adjusted a delay compensation of Rs.12,10,237/- as per clause 9.7 of the
Agreement, and the same has been accepted unconditionally. It is also the case of respondent No.1
that the total area of the flat has been increased by 271.08 square feet, and the appellants were liable
to pay for subject increase in the area. It is also stated that all the demands raised by the
respondents were according to the Flat Buyer’s Agreement. Significantly, it is alleged by respondent
No.1 that the appellants have purchased the said flat for commercial purposes and after taking over
the possession, the flat has been let out to one Shri Sunil Raman since March 2015. A lease deed to
this effect has been executed on 03.03.2016. Ergo, it is the case of respondent No.1 that the
appellants are not consumers and that the appellants’ complaint should be dismissed. Respondent
No.2 also filed a separate reply wherein it was stated that the said project ‘The Villas’ was handed
over to respondent No.1 through settlement deed dated 19.12.2013 and that respondent No.2 is
absolved of all liabilities as respondent No.1 took all the liabilities towards the project through
indemnity deed dated 09.03.2016.
7) The NCDRC after considering the rival submissions, reached to a conclusion that the appellants
do not fall under the definition of ‘consumer’ as they leased the said flat premises to Shri Sunil
Raman and the said act is considered as commercial purpose.
SUBMISSIONS
Vinit Bahri vs M/S Mgf Developers Ltd on 4 February, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126128049/
2
8) Learned counsel for the appellants contended that the residential unit purchased by the
appellants was purely purchased for personal usage and the NCDRC has committed an error in
observing that the subject premises were purchased for commercial usage. The sole intent of the
appellants behind purchasing the residential unit was to live closer to their parents. To buttress his
submissions, the learned counsel for the appellants relied upon the decisions in IREO Private Ltd.
vs. Aloke Anand and Others2; and Synco Textiles Pvt. Ltd. vs. Greaves Cotton and Company Ltd.3.
9) Per contra, learned senior counsel for the respondents supported the impugned judgment and
prayed for dismissal of this Appeal. ANALYSIS
10) The pivotal question which falls for our considerations is whether the NCDRC was right in
dismissing the complaint filed by the appellants on the premise that they do not fall under the
definition of ‘consumer’ for leasing out the subject property for commercial purposes, falling within
the exclusion clause of Section 2(1)(d) of the Consumer Protection Act, 19864. 2 (2022) 9 SCC 412 3
1990 SCC OnLine NCDRC 3 4 For Short, ‘the 1986 Act’
11) Before adverting to the issue of whether the act of the appellants in leasing the subject flat falls
under the exclusion clause of Section 2(1)(d) of the 1986 Act, it is necessary to outline the meaning
and scope of the term ‘consumer’. The said term has been defined under Section 2(1)(d) of the 1986
Act and the same is reproduced below for ready reference:
“2. Definitions (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
…
d) “consumer” means any person who,—
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid
and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any user
of such goods other than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or
promised or partly paid or partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment
when such use is made with the approval of such person, but does not include a
person who obtains such goods for resale or for any commercial purpose;
or
(ii) hires or avails of any services for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid
and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any beneficiary of such
services other than the person who hires or avails of the services for consideration paid or promised,
or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payments, when such services
are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned person; but does not include a person who
avails of such services for any commercial purpose.
Vinit Bahri vs M/S Mgf Developers Ltd on 4 February, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126128049/
3
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “commercial purpose” does not include use by a
person of goods bought and used by him and services availed by him exclusively for the purposes of
earning his livelihood by means of self-employment;” (Emphasis Supplied)
12) A bare perusal of the above provision reveals that the term ‘consumer’ encompasses any person
who buys goods or avails services for consideration, but excludes a person who obtains such goods
for resale or for any commercial purpose. The Explanation to the said clause clarifies that
‘commercial purpose’ does not include use by a person of goods bought and used by him exclusively
for the purposes of earning his livelihood by means of self-employment. While the 1986 Act does not
exhaustively define ‘commercial purpose’, though the Explanation to Section 2(1)(d) carves out an
exception for self-employment and earning livelihood, the dominant intention or dominant purpose
of the transaction is determinative of whether the purchaser falls within the exclusion clause.
13) This Court in Laxmi Engineering Works vs. P.S.G. Industrial Institute5 observed that in absence
of a statutory definition, the term ‘commercial’ denotes activities connected with or engaged in
commerce, having profit as the main aim, whereas ‘commerce’ means financial transactions,
especially buying and selling of merchandise on a large scale. This Court in Laxmi Engineering
Works (supra) approved the view taken by the NCDRC in Synco Textiles Pvt. Ltd. (supra) wherein
the NCDRC held that where a person purchases goods “with a view to using such goods for carrying
on any activity on a large scale for the purpose of earning profit” he will not be a ‘consumer’, and
that in order for the exclusion clause to apply, there must be a close nexus between the transaction
of purchase of goods and the large scale activity carried on for earning profit. This Court in Laxmi
Engineering Works (supra) further observed that the Explanation, being an exception to an
exception, clarifies that purchase of goods for 5 (1995) 3 SCC 583 ‘commercial purpose’ would not
take the purchaser out of the definition of ‘consumer’ if the commercial use is by the purchaser
himself for the purpose of earning his livelihood by means of self-employment. The Explanation
reduces the question of what constitutes ‘commercial purpose’ to a question of fact to be decided in
the circumstances of each case, and it is not the value of the goods that matters but the purpose to
which the goods bought are put to.
14) The interpretation of expression ‘commercial purpose’ was further expounded in Lilavati Kirtilal
Mehta Medical Trust vs. Unique Shanti Developers and Others6 wherein it was observed thus :
“19. To summarise from the above discussion, though a strait jacket formula cannot
be adopted in every case, the following broad principles can be culled out for
determining whether an activity or transaction is “for a commercial purpose”:
19.1. The question of whether a transaction is for a commercial purpose would
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
However, ordinarily, “commercial purpose” is understood to include manufacturing/industrial
activity or business-to-business transactions between commercial entities.
19.2. The purchase of the good or service should have a close and direct nexus with a profit-
Vinit Bahri vs M/S Mgf Developers Ltd on 4 February, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126128049/
4
generating activity.
19.3. The identity of the person making the purchase or the value of the transaction is not conclusive
to the question of whether it is for a commercial purpose. It has to be seen whether the dominant
intention or dominant purpose for the transaction was to facilitate some kind of profit generation
for the purchaser and/or their beneficiary.
6 (2020) 2 SCC 265 19.4. If it is found that the dominant purpose behind purchasing the good or
service was for the personal use and consumption of the purchaser and/or their beneficiary, or is
otherwise not linked to any commercial activity, the question of whether such a purchase was for the
purpose of “generating livelihood by means of self-employment” need not be looked into.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
15) The principles laid down in Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta Medical Trust (supra) were reiterated in Rohit
Chaudhary and Another vs. Vipul Limited7, wherein this Court observed as under:
“18. Thus, if the dominant purpose of purchasing the goods or services is for a profit
motive and this fact is evident from the record, such purchaser would not fall within
the four corners of the definition of “consumer”. On the other hand, if the answer is
in the negative, namely, if such person purchases the goods or services is not for any
commercial purpose and for one's own use, it cannot be gainsaid even in such
circumstances the transaction would be for a commercial purpose attributing profit
motive and thereby excluding such person from the definition of “consumer”.
(Emphasis Supplied)
16) While the aforesaid decisions elucidate the legal principles for determining what
constitutes ‘commercial purpose’, the equally critical question as to who bears the
burden of proving whether or not, the transaction falls within the exclusion clause of
the term ‘consumer’ was addressed by this Court in Shriram Chits (India) Private
Limited Earlier Known as Shriram Chits (K) Pvt. Ltd vs. Raghachand Associates8, in
following words:
“19. As we have shown above, the definition of consumer has three parts. The
significance of 7 (2024) 1 SCC 8 8 (2024) 9 SCC 509 deconstructing the definition
into three parts was for the purpose of explaining on whom lies the onus to prove
each of the different parts. There can hardly be any dispute that the onus of proving
the first part i.e. that the person had bought goods/availed services for a
consideration, rests on the complainant himself. The carve out clause, in the second
part, is invoked by the service providers to exclude the complainants from availing
benefits under the Act. The onus of proving that the person falls within the carve out
must necessarily rest on the service provider and not the complainant. This is in sync
with the general principle embodied in Sections 101 and 102 of the Evidence Act,
1872 that “one who pleads must prove”. Since it is always the service provider who
Vinit Bahri vs M/S Mgf Developers Ltd on 4 February, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126128049/
5
pleads that the service was obtained for a commercial purpose, the onus of proving
the same would have to be borne by it.
Further, it cannot be forgotten that the Consumer Protection Act is a consumer-friendly and
beneficial legislation intended to address grievances of consumers. [National Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Harsolia Motors, (2023) 8 SCC 362 : (2023) 4 SCC (Civ) 53] Moreover, a negative burden cannot be
placed on the complainant to show that the service available was not for a commercial purpose.
20. Having held that the onus to prove that the service was obtained for a commercial purpose is on
the service provider, we may clarify the standard of proof that has to be met in order to discharge
the onus. The standard of proof has to be measured against a “preponderance of probabilities”. The
test to determine whether service obtained qualified as a commercial purpose is no longer res
integra in view of this Court's decision in Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta case [Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta Medical
Trust v. Unique Shanti Developers, (2020) 2 SCC 265 : (2020) 1 SCC (Civ) 320] . Para 19 sets out
the principles on which it must be determined whether the onus of proving “commercial purpose”
has been properly discharged by the service provider.
21. If and only if, the service provider discharges its onus of showing that the service was availed, in
fact for a commercial purpose, does the onus shift back to the complainant to bring its case within
the third part i.e. Explanation (a) to Section 2(7) — to show that the service was obtained exclusively
for the purpose of earning its livelihood by means of self-employment.” (Emphasis Supplied)
17) In the light of the aforesaid adjudications and for the reasons discussed hereinbefore, we are of
the considered view that the NCDRC has erred in dismissing the appellants’ complaint. The onus of
proving that the appellants fall within the exclusion clause of Section 2(1)(d) of the 1986 Act rests
upon the respondents, and the respondents have failed to discharge this onus on a preponderance of
probabilities. The determinative question is whether the dominant intention or dominant purpose
behind purchasing the flat was to facilitate profit generation through commercial activity, and
whether there exists a close and direct nexus between the purchase and such profit-generating
activity. The respondents have not placed any cogent material on record to establish such nexus. The
mere factum of leasing out the flat does not, by itself, demonstrate that the appellants purchased the
property with the dominant purpose of engaging in commercial activity. The question of what
constitutes ‘commercial purpose’ is a question of fact to be decided in the circumstances of each case
based on the purpose to which the goods/properties were purchased. It must be emphasized that the
mere act of purchasing immovable property, even multiple units, cannot ipso facto attract the
exclusion clause of Section 2(1)(d) of the 1986 Act unless and until it is proved that the dominant
purpose behind such purchase was commercial in nature. In absence of such proof, the appellants
cannot be excluded from the definition of ‘consumer’ under the 1986 Act.
18) In our view, the Complaint Case needs consideration on merits by the NCDRC. Accordingly, we
set aside the impugned judgment dated 11.05.2023 passed by the NCDRC and restore Consumer
Complaint No.74/2017 to its original number to the file of the NCDRC. The NCDRC shall proceed to
decide the Consumer Complaint on merits and in accordance with law.
19)    The Appeal is allowed.
Vinit Bahri vs M/S Mgf Developers Ltd on 4 February, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126128049/
6
                                     …………………..........................J.
                                     (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
.………………............................J. (N.V. ANJARIA) NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 04, 2026.
Vinit Bahri vs M/S Mgf Developers Ltd on 4 February, 2026
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126128049/
7